[inaudible].
Hello Joe. What's going on man? Man, good to see Ya. Thanks. Thanks.
I feel a little overdressed. Sorry about that. Good. You know, ah, look at that.
A little bit of story night there. Yeah, you're really into that, huh? Yeah,
I got, I guess. Is that, yeah, your phone. So you remembered. Yes. Yeah, yeah.
That's on the phone. Starry night. What do I like about story night?
It's not what Vango saw that night.
It's what he felt. How do you know what he felt?
Because this is not an a representation of reality and anything that deviates
from reality is reality that has filtered through your senses.
And I think art edits highest is exactly that.
If this was an exact depiction of reality,
it would be a photograph and I don't need the artist. Hmm, okay.
So even photographs that take you to a slightly other kind of dimension as you
gaze upon them, it's more than what was actually going on at the time.
And that's, that's art taken to the craft of photography.
That's why you like it this way. It's one of the reasons why. Plus,
I think it was the very first painting where it's title is the background.
Think about that. This could have been called, you know, in the full painting,
obviously this is a snippet. Yeah. Yeah. So there's a town there,
there's a cypress tree, there's a church depot.
It could have been called the cypress tree.
It could have been called sleepy village.
It could have been called rolling hills. But no,
it's called starry night and everything in front of it.
Everything in front of it is just in the way.
And how often do you paint something where the title is the background that
that's my point. And in this particular case,
the background is the universe. And so,
so for me this was a pivot point in art and it's 1889 which is recent given the
history of paintings and you know, they'd go all the way back.
So yeah, there, there it. Is that your favorite painting ever?
I have to say yes, it's not.
What are you doing?
And I have four or five ties that have this painting on them in different ways.
Yeah. So I'm all in. I'm all in.
What's interesting is that the town is [inaudible].
Have you seen story night in Bacon? Somebody didn't look,
dig it up on the screen. Somebody did it in Bacon. It was just crazy
weird. Yeah. So yeah.
How weird. Go back to the original one please.
What's interesting about the original one is that the town is realistically
depicted. The trees are recognizable as trees.
If you ever saw a sky that looked like that, the end would be here. Yeah,
exactly.
Plus that swirling is not wind and it's not clouds because it was,
if it was clouds, you wouldn't see the stars. Right. We'll start.
It's how he felt. That's all I can tell you. By the way, that is a real evening,
so that's, sorry. It's not even the, it's early morning. The crescent moon,
when it's that orientation means this is before sunrise and that white object
lower on the horizon, that sort of glowy,
that's very likely Venus and that enables us to trace what's over,
what set of weeks. This painting was actually painted. So it's,
it's kind of like a forensic astronomy as they will done an analysis of like
where he must have been. Yeah. That's well known. Yeah.
He was in a real place and so that [inaudible] pull this out of his ass. Right.
I mean it was, he painted what he saw folded into what he felt.
Yeah. That's how art should be, I think. Yeah. Otherwise, what do you,
what do you need artists for a make cool shit?
The cool stuff is something that they felt that it came out of them. Yeah.
And they feel stuff. They, artists feel, feel the,
the natural world in ways different from the rest of us.
And that's why they're artists.
Do they or do they just express it with oh sorry. Yes. They not only, yes,
we all can feel it,
but to be able to express it that that's a whole other talent.
They know what I think about often. Um, why do you,
why do we all know who Paul Revere is? All right. We all, we,
we, it's a household name yet.
Is there any other war ever fought in the history of the world?
We're a household name is the name of the person who told other people the enemy
was coming. We, we can mention his name,
but we can't list the generals that all fought in that war. Why?
It's because a poem was written about him and he had this mundane job.
Let me tell people the enemy is coming and so the artists, in this case,
the poet elevated the mundane to something that forces you to,
to reckon it with your understanding of this world.
What's Joyce Joyce Kilmer, his most famous poem about a tree.
Dogs piss on trees. You drive by trees.
You don't even know they're there yet. A poem about a tree.
I'll never see something as lovely as a tree. Oh my gosh,
this is so the art forces you to pause and just reflect on things that you took
for granted,
things that became ordinary in your life and they were elevated to to two.
They get beatified by the talents of artists will be edify.
You never know. We identify. Yeah, I'm using it loosely.
It's the intermediate step between being an ordinary person and being a saint.
The beatification of someone in the Catholic Church,
I would've thought it's making something more beautiful. Uh, oh, maybe. Okay.
I don't, it could have similar roots be attribute be UTM man. I couldn't,
it could come from that.
But to be at BB ratified as the first steps on route to sainthood.
Oh yeah. That's, if I remember the word correctly. Here it goes. Oh, you got it.
Pull it up.
The definition to make supremely happy Christianity declare to have attained
blessedness of heaven and authorize the title blessed and limited public
religious honor. She was beatified six years after her death.
So I think you can't become a saint unless you previously been beatified.
I think that's the role,
but I'm looking at the number one definition of there to make supremely happy.
So that's interest. Interesting. Yeah. That, that yeah,
that moved ahead of a definition of beatify. Yeah.
So it's a two beatified the, the verb was up there. Uh, you had on the screen,
Roman Catholic Church. Uh,
he beatified one Diego Indian belief to have a vision of a Virgin Mary,
a synonyms canonize sanctify, hollow consecrate.
So I think if you take something ordinary and you subject it to the
interpretation of an artist,
it can be beatified and elevated on a level where it becomes a household
recognition of its importance in this world.
So my brothers and artists, my brothers and artists,
so I have a kind of art fine art,
but also he paints and he teaches history of art. So I, I,
I've had this sort of baptism my whole life being exposed to him. I'm the,
you know, the, the sip, the sibling scientist, but the,
they have an artist in the family. I this,
everyone should have an artist in family. I've got an uncle and of course the,
the whole steam movement, science, technology, engineering and math. Uh,
the artists got in, they say, wait, I'm so stem the stem movement.
So I say they want to throw in the A to get art as part of that movement.
Science, technology, engineering, art and math. Change it from stem to steam.
So steam. So you get full steam ahead. Steam is a better word in that. Well,
they both good words for what they need,
but I just sounds like a bunch of awesome stuff like it does and yeah,
throw in comedy and building houses, you know,
it seems like you're getting very, it's like the LBGTQ
do things that get really squirrely when you start adding more letters. Yeah,
you can add letters, but if it doesn't spell anything,
then the memorization has to kick in. But steam,
you don't have to memorize that it's already there for you. Right.
So it's cleverly conceived. I think it's the abbreviation was it?
It's tacit recognition that these are elements in society that advanced
civilization and, and grow the economy actually.
So in fact,
there's hardly any growth economy in the world that isn't growing because it has
been for not having been touched by science or technology, everything.
Just think about it. So if you're round running,
you don't have them on your show. But if you're running around saying,
I don't like science, science is bad, science is evil. Okay,
well then you will die in poverty if you elect officials who believe that as
well.
Who the fuck thinks that science is bad in 2019 and how do they express this?
They express it through science. Okay, so you know what I'm saying?
Like are they saying it?
I have a book coming out in a month called letters from an astrophysicist. Okay.
Yeah, it's, it's not, it's not out yet, but I've got it.
It's not how did you get a copy? But I don't even have my copy yet.
But what I'm saying in there I,
there's a whole chapter on just angry people who don't like anything including
science. And one of them, it's a, it's a, it's a riff. He just says, I hate it.
And it's science that science is,
it brings some of the worst things that's ever happened to humanity and
pollution and this, he goes on and on and on and on and on. And so I reply,
there's letters from an astrophysicist and I, and I reply as,
as commonly and as rationally as is possible when you get attacked that way.
But what I'm saying is, um,
not everyone embraces everything that science does and some will cherry pick it.
You have the science deniers for global warming of science deniers with
vaccines. You have science Meyers with GMOs. You know, there's,
there's all manner of science denying going on in modern society and you know,
we in a free society, what are you going to do, right?
That people can think what they want. But if,
if thinking what they want influences policy, which then affects everybody,
then your science denial has consequences to the economic health of the nation.
And by the way, it's not only economics, it's your, the economic health,
it's your physical health cause medicine flows through advances in science as
well as our security.
Well this people that deny some aspects of science while conveniently using
other, that's where it gets weird, right?
You're driving a car that's relying on gps using a phone to complain about the
global warming hoax. You know, you're right. Correct. One of my more,
a more sort of popular tweets was you remember when the,
we had the photo of the black hole from a distant galaxy and it was,
it was banner headlines maybe a year ago, less than a year ago,
banner headlines and a first photo ever of a black hole.
And it was an astounding engineering achievement to accomplish that.
It was multiple telescopes all around the world pooling the data to get it
right.
And it was one of the greatest collaborative efforts we've ever undertaken in my
field of astrophysics. Okay. And everybody was loving the results.
So all I tweeted was
scientists report first photo of a black hole public.
Ah, scientists report. Humans are warming the earth.
Oh, you brought it up. Okay. Scientists,
we produced the first ever image of a supermassive black hole,
55 million light years away. The response, Ooh, scientists,
we've concluded the humans are catastrophic warming.
The Earth response that conflicts with what I want to be true.
So it must be false. Well,
that is the cherry picking of science as the Cherry picking assignments.
But the, the global warming thing is very much connected to, uh,
a certain type of ideology. A certain type of person who thinks mattered to me.
No nonsense person, I'm saying yes, it does matter. What I'm,
what I'm trying to say is that is a demographic that has cherry picked science
to deny human caused global warming.
There are other democratic demographics that have cherry picked other science to
deny other things.
And it's not all located in one political spectrum.
I mean in one political branch, right?
So you tend to find liberal folk complaining that the conservatives who have
embraced node, the node global warming platform or denying science,
and they need science on their side,
and many of those same people are rubbing crystals together to be healed by the
crystal energy.
Or they're denying vaccines thinking that there's some somehow bad for you.
And so,
so all of this requires some are total rejection of mainstream science.
And we were living in that world now and I don't know,
I don't think it'll stop the progress of civilization,
but it can certainly slow it down and occasionally stall it. Well,
that is certainly a problem, but how big of a problem is it?
Like how many people are really in denial of science in 2019 it's gotta be for
me in a free country, that's not what matters.
What matters is in a free country that you elect officials who are not official.
Yes. You elect people who are scientifically literate.
They don't have to be scientists,
a I G or if they're not scientifically illiterate.
They should be self aware of that and then listen to people who are so don't you
think what they're doing though is they're,
they're doing what their constituents would like them to do.
That's why I don't be politicians over the head ever. I don't do that.
We're where we're a republic. We're a democracy. Whatever they believe.
If they think earth is 6,000 years old and they got elected,
it's because the people elected them believe their earth is 6,000 years old or
because they're willing to let that one go because they believe in the hot pot.
Possibly.
That's a good point because you have a portfolio of thoughts and beliefs all
because he's such a profound Christian. I mean,
he's so profoundly Christian that he's,
he just wants any of Christians who are connected to science that don't,
including the pope, by the way, you know, can get more Christian than the pope.
All right? He believes in science. Now this new pope is pretty interesting.
If you read, if you read his in cyclical from a couple of years ago, it's, it's,
it's a scientifically literate doc document and no,
this, okay, so it's not, he's still religious, right?
So Jesus still rose from the dead and there was still miracles and all the rest
of that in the new testament so that he's not in denial of that.
But given that he is saying, oh my gosh, here's something we,
the religious community and scientists can partner behind and that if we want to
save life on earth,
and so we have to be better shepherds of what is going on on this earth.
And one of them is we don't want to flood low lying countries in the South
Pacific where the average sea level is 10 feet above sea level or whatever it
is, you're gonna lose these countries if you keep melting our, our,
our um, uh, the, the, that, the ice caps,
cause that would include the north and there's no land in the north. So, uh,
the glacier ice, that's land-based ice, right?
Cause any ice that's in the water floating that can melt in,
it's not gonna change the water level.
So it's why you can do this experiments really cool. Fill up your glass,
put some a few cubes of ice in a glass of water,
fill the glass up as much as you possibly can without spilling it.
And the ice is bobbing above that level. Okay?
Cause ice is about 10% buoyant on that.
About 10% of an ice cube will be lifted above this. This is,
this is the iceberg equation, right? Right. That's the tip of the iceberg. Well,
you see the 10% above and 90% is not visible to you. This is, by the way,
I don't want to get to too many off-ramps here, but that's one of the,
one of the things that they did right in titanic. Okay.
If you look at the earliest titanic movie there was in black and white,
they see this huge iceberg on the horizon and then it can,
they can't swear away from it cause it, oh my gosh, it doesn't have, no,
no.
The iceberg that cuts the bottom of your boat is a little bit of ice sticking
out above the water because 90% of it is underwater and that's where the damage
occurs. And in the James Cameron Titanic,
the iceberg that they hit above water was, looks like a little chunk of ice it.
Oh, that couldn't hurt anything. All the damage was under water. Anyhow,
so back to this,
so do this experiment and then let the glass sit there and let the ice melt and
the water level will stay the same because when ice melts, it gets,
takes up lower volume than it was when it became ice.
And that's why pipes break.
I thought pipes break just because the water expands. Yeah,
I just described that in the opposite direction. Oh Wow. As it freezes it.
But I didn't know it gets larger. That's what expansion means. What kind of,
what your vocabulary here, right? No, but I'm saying like, no, no. Right, right.
So, so your ice cube is sitting at 10%.
Your Ice Cube is sitting 10% above the water level and it melts and becomes
water. The water takes up 90% of the volume of the ice.
So that just melt back into the water and it doesn't overflow even though it was
sticking above the waterline when you had the glass.
So now let's do the opposite. Okay. There's water in the pipes, right? What,
can I tell you something that might blow your mind? No, sure. Is that allowed?
I don't know. How many times does your mind you? At least once a day. Yeah.
At least we need your mind blown. Okay. Here's how it works. Okay.
So let's put water in the pipes. Okay. Um,
and then the temperature drops. The pipes have a certain strength.
Copper pipes, you know, they're rigid. Okay. I grew up in breaking pipes.
Okay. So Watch,
it's so the water's in there and now the temperature begins to drop. Okay.
Um, the water wants to turn to ice,
but it can't because the pipe is containing it.
So just sits there. Okay. At 32 degrees as water,
even though the temperature outside is dropping below 32 degrees,
okay. And it still sits there, gets the 30 degrees,
29 the pipe is squeezing that attempt of this water to become ice.
And the act of squeezing it prevents the temperature from dropping. Okay?
And you as the temperature drops,
depending on how strong the pipe is to and the temperature gradient across it,
as the outside temperature continue, it gets to now 25 degrees,
the pipe is still holding onto the liquid water that gets,
and it's still 32 degrees inside there and it holds onto and it's keeps
happening and keeps happening.
You get a point where the pipe can no longer contain the water and the water
freezes spontaneously.
It just goes right down to that temperature.
And the pipe is helpless in the face of this. So the point is,
the stronger the pipe is,
the lower the temperature has to be outside for the freezing water to break it.
So theoretically,
if you had a pipe that was made of a stronger material than copper,
you can get even lower than you can get an even lower temperatures.
How low can you get? Uh, when,
when things freeze, they have to expand. So what, uh,
not only when water freezes does water expand? When it's, it's, it's,
it's a remarkable fact about water that is shared by very few other ingredients.
Most things when they cool, they shrink as all men know.
So, uh, so, so most,
most materials cause things cooler.
The vibrating molecules slow down and they take up less space.
Water is the opposite of that as it passes down through. So,
so I'm going to describe to you an extraordinary fact about water and why we're
alive today. Okay? So Watch, let's take a lake that has fish in it. Okay.
Temperature drops outside and the lake slowly begins to get cooler because
there's a 10 time lag between the air temperature and the waters.
That's why the first freeze, the lake is still there, it's gotta be cold longer.
I said, what happens? The water gets cold on the surface. Okay.
And
it begins to, okay,
the water gets cold on a surface and it begins to shrink so that water false is
shrink. That makes it denser. It falls to the bottom fine.
It does that down to about four degrees Celsius.
As it goes from four degrees Celsius to zero degrees Celsius,
the freezing point,
it begins to expand and become less dense than the water.
So now as the water wants to actually freeze,
it stays on top. When it does freeze,
you freeze the top surface of the lake. Well, how about the water below it?
It's insulated from the dropping air temperature and the fish don't die.
Imagine if ice were denser than water. What would happen?
You'd freeze the top layer. It would sink. The bottom is frozen freeze.
The next layer it sinks and fish.
We'd be systematically forced to swim in shallower and shallower waters until
they were all freeze dried on the top surface of the lake and all fishes would
be dead every winter. I think it's every lake fish.
What he's suppose to say fishes, fishes is a, is a double plural.
You could do that. Yeah. You never heard fish was dead. You never called deer.
Would you say all deers? Well,
because generally it's one if you had multiple kinds of deer. Oh,
so have you had like Sitcom, but it's rare that they're all in the same place.
You only have one kind of deal with me.
But if the ocean has many kinds of fish in the same place. Oh yeah.
That's interesting. So you'd say fishes, fishes, it's a double floor.
It's different kinds of plural fish. Oh yeah, the double blow my mind.
You didn't know you didn't know that again. Oh No, no, I didn't know.
I never thought of it that way. There are many fishes in the Oh yeah, yeah.
So sorry. She's in the seat. Yeah. So multiple plurals uh,
different types of fish to get where ocean water freezes.
Cause that's where it was salt is salt water.
Did you have the reef fishes up there?
Some weird anomaly that happened where there was too or too little oxygen in the
water and somehow the frozen fish got pushed out in a wall of ice.
Is the South Dakota
[inaudible] so there's too little oxygen. I don't know. I can't explain that.
I don't know what happened there. If you look at the,
if you look at the green in the water, most likely it's algae.
So that happens with certain legs that get polluted with certain types of,
you can kill the lake by doing that job. Well you get it in the ocean too.
You get these zones but I don't see how you get frozen fish though.
That's incredible. But Scroll, stop, go back up.
Scroll down. So we could read it for free fish.
Frozen a wall of ice in South Dakota is Lake Andes. National Wildlife Refuge.
That's incredible man. Is that a video Jamie? The pictures though?
I don't know.
I don't know how they froze cause they can just swim to where it's not frozen.
So I'd have to, I'd have to do more homework on that one to see what,
what caused that. Wow. Gotcha. So,
so my point is because of this property of water that ice floats,
it insulates the bottom layers of the lake and fish can survive over the winter.
That's because of this work too. Right? Insulate.
So you can inside you get a like a nice dog. Yeah, sure. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean if you put a barrier between you and the changing elements outside,
that's basically an insulating layer. Have you ever done ice fishing? No,
I never, never.
It's a good one to New York City life person in New York City.
People go ice fishing, I'm sure in central.
Do Women go ice fishing to get away from their husbands? They do.
It's like why do people golf? You know,
ice fishing is a particularly weird because you have to continually scoop out
the ice and maybe even drill. Right?
So that works because frozen water is less dense than non frozen water and it's
one of the rare ingredients for which that so,
and it's likely there would be no life on land or anywhere on earth if that were
the case, if the opposite of that were the case.
So water is a very special ingredient to life on earth.
It's cited by many religious folks is saying, see Earth is sacred for these.
It's in the list of special ingredients for what make earth habitable for life.
That that is a really strange thing though,
that if you can contain it somehow or an incredibly strong pipe, yes,
it won't freeze. Yes. It will freeze the temperature variant though.
Is there a number?
Well that's what doesn't matter why pipes don't freeze when it just hits 30
degrees outside. That's not when you hear it.
It freezes when it gets really low, when the crack and yeah,
and then it'll just, it'll break the copper like it's paper, tear it.
Like it's like, it's now on the flip side of that,
try this at home.
Take an ice cube that's like at 30 degrees.
Okay. Uh, how would you measure that?
Pull out an ice cube and just because there'll be at near zero Fahrenheit if
you, if you have a good freezer, just pull that and leave it on the counter,
put it, put it on a wooden cutting board. Okay.
And just let it sit there for like 10 minutes and its temperature will come up.
There'll be a point where it hasn't melted yet,
but you can take it and squeeze the Ice Cube and you can force it to melt by
squeezing it cause you're forcing it into a smaller volume that it currently
contains. And the only way you can accomplish that is if the ice turns to water,
then it will occupy a smaller volume.
So the act of squeezing ice can actually melt it.
So if you had some sort of a pipe that could physically construct like something
that had threads in it,
there could wind down to a smaller size and you could stick a cylinder of ice in
it and you could slowly crank it. Oh yeah. Yes, yes. It would melt. Yes,
you can melt if you had some machine that squeezed ice.
And the cold or the ice is the harder, the more the,
the harder it would be for you to squeeze it to, to accomplish that.
So it's sort of fun with ice. In fact, you know what else you can do?
This is a harder experiment to do. If you take a mesh like a screen Mesh,
it has to be sort of wider openings then a screen door would, uh,
so what would this be like a fence, like a,
a chain link fence and behold horizontally and get a big block of ice and just
place it on top. A block of ice that's heavy.
What'll happen is the ice,
the weight of the ice will melt the ice in the contact points of the chain
itself because it's feeling that pressure to squeeze it into a smaller volume.
But by the time it melts,
the ice has now passed through the grate and it will refreeze on the other side.
So you can actually pass a block of ice through a chain link fence vertically
just by pushing it. Yeah, it's pretty, it's a pretty cool,
it's a slow experiment, but it's wrong. I mean,
it depends on the temperature of the ice and how and how and how much it weighs.
Because the pressure is what, this is why. This is why you can ice skate.
Why can you skate on ice?
Because the edge of the blade is very high pressure on the ice and it's melting
a bead of water and you're actually gliding on water when you're skating,
you're not skating on slippery ice. Really? Yes.
I thought you were just cutting the ice with the blade. Well, so the blade,
have you ever seen a sharpened blade? It's not just flat.
There's actually a concave cross-section to it. So each edge,
the left edge and the right edge is, is basically a knife edge. Okay.
Not quite as sharp as a knife, but it's, you can feel how it's,
it's sharp so that when you lean on that edge,
either your inner edge or outer edge,
your entire body weight is being held up on this on a very narrow surface area
of the blade. So the pressure is extreme. It's like, you know,
thousand pounds per square inch. You don't weigh a thousand pounds,
but you're not skating on a square inch. Right? So you,
you do the math on that and what you can have is, uh,
you will skate and you're actually,
what makes it so slippery on ice skates is because you're moving on a beat of
water that freezes right behind you as you go past it, dude.
Yeah. So it's possible for ice to be so cold.
You can't really skate on it because even that pressure is not enough to melt
it. How cold would it have to be that I,
I last I did a calculation was really cold, like tens of degrees below zero.
How does dry ice work? Oh, it's just frozen carbon dioxide. That's all.
So here's the difference. Here's the difference.
You have a block of frozen h two o and a block of frozen CO2.
So there they are.
It turns out the air pressure on earth is high enough at sea level,
is high enough to allow the ice to melt and sustain a liquid state.
Okay.
The CO2 under air pressure, normal air pressure.
It wants to melt, but it can't sustain a liquid and it goes straight to gas.
If we had much higher air pressure, you could,
you could have CO2 melt and have liquid CO2.
So now watch it happen. So, so can I blow your mind again? This is just,
this is really good stuff. Okay. It's good. Like physical chemistry.
So here you go. So Watch, it happens.
So what happens if I reduce the air pressure? Okay,
well the transition from ice to water is still the same. It's not effected,
but the boiling point is affected. As you know,
cooking times have to be adjusted on mountaintops because when you boil water is
not 212 degrees. Depending on the height of the mountain,
there's less air pressing down that Ph preventing it from boiling. Okay?
The boiling point is not some absolute fact about the water.
It has to do with what the air pressure is sitting above it.
Do you have an extremely high air pressure?
Water has to go to a much higher temperature before it boils. So our,
so the boiling point of water that's reported in all textbooks is at sea level.
At one atmospheric pressure. That's how you get 212 degrees.
If you start reducing the atmospheric pressure, it's 210 degrees, 205 degrees,
200 degrees, 190 degrees, 180 degrees. 180 oh yes.
And so that's not as hot as 212 degrees. She got to cook the food longer.
All cooking times are increased for this reason. So now watch,
I'm not done with you. Oh, let's keep reducing the air pressure.
Okay. Theoretical possible. No,
no Himalayas. Yep. But or take it up.
You can ascend in some kind of copter or some kind of device or air balloon or
whatever. But I'm saying you can do this experiment in a, in a, in a laboratory.
Okay. Okay. You keep reducing the air pressure. Boiling point keeps dropping.
It's a hard in 70 degrees, 150120100 degrees Fahrenheit,
80 degrees Fahrenheit, 50 degrees Fahrenheit,
40 degrees Fahrenheit, 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Holy Shit. What happens?
The ice melts and becomes water,
the water evaporates and become steam.
And all of that's happening at 32 degrees.
There is an atmospheric pressure for which water,
ice and steam coexist and it's called the triple point of water.
And all ingredients have a triple point. Wow.
What is Mars? Mars is very close to the triple point of water.
So you can have,
you can have a simultaneous bath in certain regions of Mars,
a simultaneous bath because the air pressure is so low. It's like one,
100th earth's air pressure. It's very, very low.
So you have a place where a pot of water,
ice cubes and steam are coming out all at once. Is that the triple point?
So, so,
so here's the lesson here is we live life in our world at one atmospheric
pressure at one, um,
uh, room temperature, atmospheric pressure.
And we define what is normal based on that life experience based on how,
how our senses interact with that environment.
But the actual universe is far freakier than what we,
that what our senses are exposed, our five senses are exposed to on earth.
What did you think about Elon Musk's idea about nuking the poles of Mars in
order to make it warmer? Yes. So some of these are kind of pie in the sky ideas,
right? But let's, let's get to what he's trying to get at.
What you want to do is you want to introduce warmth.
You want to block the ozone,
you want to block the ultraviolet so that you can protect organic life,
right? So we have an ozone layer. It's the three oxygen atoms.
Oh three and oxygen or ozone likes ultraviolet light.
So ultra bright light comes from the sun. It gets eaten by ozone, it gets eaten.
And when you do that, the ultra right light doesn't make it to Earth surface.
So even though they say, oh, where, where, uh,
sunscreen and Sunblock, 45? Yes,
that's for the 1% of the ultraviolet that gets through the atmosphere.
If you're above the atmosphere, you are fried. So the PR,
because ultraviolet is highly hostile to organic molecules and what we're made
of as life. So you want to protect, you want to give life a chance.
So you want to not only heat Mars,
you want to find a way to block the ultraviolet light coming from the sun.
So you need some mechanism, if not ozone, where it just live underground,
for example. Okay. And so, uh,
so I don't think we should think of the idea as a literal thing,
but just, it's a general principle of what you want to accomplish on Mars.
In doing so. Do you want a warm it?
You want to protect what could be the future of, uh, biochemistry.
And then you seed it and you, and then you wait. You want to wait too long.
You want it. So to speed it up if you could. And then you terraform Mars,
space x has, I visited him a couple of times. He's,
he's got a mug you can buy there. Then it has Mars on it. Okay.
And then you put, put hot liquid in it and Mars turns to an airable,
a blue green marble. So yeah, it's very good.
And it doesn't tell you that when you, Zoe, I got a Mars Mug, you know,
and you show it off and go, oh my gosh, well what did that happen?
Is it Earth Mug? But it doesn't look like earth.
There's a lot of people that go, uh, on, uh,
also we think there's a lot of water that was once on Mars,
which is a certainty and we think it's just sitting below in a permafrost.
So you wouldn't have to bring water to Mars by the way.
And the really distant future,
you can just redirect a comment and get all the water you need.
But how far distant is that? The comments everywhere, dude.
We're not shooting galleries. That's not what I asked. Oh,
how do you think it is before we could read the right, how far away in time?
Okay, sorry. Um,
uh, we know how to do it, but there's no real incentive.
So there's no engineering funded engineering plan to do it,
but we know how to do it on paper. We know how to do it in a conceivable way.
Oh yeah. So there, so first of all,
it happens with or without us because we are in the shooting path of countless
thousands of asteroids and comets, right?
So what you would do is you'd find one that's headed close to us anyway in the
seventh orbit down the line or the hundredth orbit down the line,
and then you slightly deflected in such a way that it would then collide with
Mars or even earth if you wanted earth needed to more freshwater. Yeah,
I heard that there's a possible [inaudible].
The problem is if something really big that would fill lakes worth or if that
collided with earth,
that would just be bad for life on earth because it's a spontaneous deposit of
energy that can change the climate and do so you want to do that on a planet
that you're trying to terraform.
Isn't that the speculation of how water got here in the first place?
So the jury's still out on that. There is there tags in the oceans,
uh,
in the water molecule that tell you that the water must have come from more than
one source. So that's what's confusing things. We want it to be a simple thing.
It all came by comments or it all came from inside the earth through volcanoes,
volcanoes emit
lakes, and historically lakes and oceans worth of water just out of their,
out of their calderas. So, so the problem is what,
as we say in science over determined,
there's plenty of comments to have delivered all the water.
There's plenty of water that could've come out of, uh, out of, um,
volcanoes to give us all the way. So, but in the oceans, it's clearly a mixture.
And so the final word is still out on that.
What do you think about what's going on in Hawaii now with the protesting of the
building of this largest and latest telescope? Yes. The, the, the, uh,
TMT 30 meter telescope, which should be to, uh, you know,
the largest ever by far of any kind of telescope.
The history of astronomy is one where bigger telescopes become bigger buckets to
collect light.
That's the only telescopes today are the same as telescopes when they were
invented. They're just bigger, right?
The principle behind them is bigger because what they're doing is simple.
All you're trying to do is get as much light as possible.
And the more light you get, the dimmer is the object you can detect.
And the farther away is the object you can see.
And so for every generation of new large telescopes that have been built,
it is,
it has increased and deepened our understanding of our place in the universe.
So that's just the, that's the background.
The proposal is for a 30 meter telescope, largest ever,
um, on the big island of Hawaii and Monica. Were there other telescopes there?
Other, that's where the CAC is, right? Yeah, I think if where the CAC is,
I think they s they cited it in a place that's sort of tucked behind most sight
lines to it, but that's not so much what's important here.
It's that the native Hawaiians, from what I've read, uh,
view the mountain as a sacred place. And so,
uh,
to put a telescope yet another telescope there becomes sort of invasion of
sacred land. And so, so yeah, it's, it's,
it's a, there's a standoff. Last I looked, I mean,
people protesting in the streets and there's some native Hawaiians who embrace
this because it means jobs, high, high quality jobs, engineering jobs.
Cause you gotta build it. You've got gotta maintain it.
There's an entire supportive infrastructure for that. That means jobs.
Um, and it's done in collaboration with the University of Hawaii. Um, and the,
all the other telescopes are partnered with the University of Hawaii where
people are educated there. And so, so at the end of the day,
you have to ask, well, how are you gonna make decisions going forward?
Are gonna make them democratically then you take a vote or you do you want the
natives to, to be the deciders of their own fate?
And is that democratic? OK, so the natives vote okay?
Or is it the few people who are protesting, do they win the day? I mean, it's,
it's complicated and it's very, it's very,
there are a lot of nuanced issues going on there. There's a,
there's a branch of thinking that the, the United States government and,
and normal municipal, uh, leaders have no authority over it.
There are some who claim that this is native Hawaiian property that does not
belong to any municipal entity of the u s government. So therefore,
even state representatives have no say, right? So there's a lot going on there,
okay. But if I were to weigh in, this is how I would do so.
Okay. I would say first, um,
I think what should happen is,
I don't know if they even have the infrastructure,
I don't know how the system is set up, but if they could set it up this way,
if the mountain is viewed as sacred by the natives,
the natives should have entire say of what happens to the mountain. Okay?
That's how I think that should be.
So now what you want to make sure is that whatever decision gets made and voted
upon by the natives, that is fully informed you want,
you don't want to vote being misinformed or under informed in any election,
let alone whether you're voting for a telescope on your Sacred Mountain, okay?
Otherwise, you're voting out of nowhere, right? Yet your net, you're,
you're influencing your future based on partial information and decisions based
on partial information or bad decisions no matter what. Okay.
So I would say hold a vote with the natives and make sure everybody's fully
informed. And here's a bit of information.
I just want to add to the information. Okay.
You know what we do as astrophysicists?
We study the universe rather passively at that.
We sit there at the end of a telecom and wait for light to reach us.
It's not a petri dish where we stir it or heated or freeze it or crack it or
we're just Kinda, they're communing with the cosmos.
My Phd thesis was significantly fed by data that I obtained from mountaintops at
telescopes. I got my data from mountains in Chile,
a set of two Lolo Ma and it employed all the natives, the natives,
the local local people. All right. That's another telescope that,
so there's all these telescopes that all have specific um, um,
access points to the universe. They're not all asking the same questions. Right?
And so it's the collection of all the data that gives us the complete
understanding. What we think is a complete understanding of the universe.
So what we do is try to understand our place in the universe.
And all I'm going to say is that if you have power over what happens on that
mountain and it's sacred to you,
because whatever that is,
it is something important to you and your sense of your understanding of your
place in this world.
That would be spiritual significance.
I can tell you that what we learn as astrophysicists from those mountaintops,
it gives us a deeper understanding of who and what we are in this universe.
So I would say that would ever is your concept of God,
be it the, the creator of the universe,
the spirit energy that pervades all of space and time, whatever is your concept,
the discoveries of astrophysicists bring you closer to it.
I get your perspective. Let me be the opposing view.
They feel that I'm not trying to, no, I know this is just information.
I'm putting this information and I walk out of the room and then y'all vote,
right? I'm not, you know, we believe in democracy here and majority rules.
That's a, that's kind of a good thing. It's kind of worked all right,
but if it's not majority rules, I don't know how they're going to make decision,
but let's say invent a future where that there, the natives vote. If they vote,
I wanted to make sure they heard what I just said and now take control of your
own fate. I just don't think they care.
I think they've decided that that's a sacred space and they don't want anybody
doing anything to it. Then that's their decision. Then you think that's okay.
I know I don't, I don't judge people's.
Um, but if you wanted to make a convincing appeal to them, no.
All I would say what I just told you, that's it.
That all I would tell them and when they vote,
I want them to understand that fact.
I could take it one step further and say
mountaintops. Because of the access they give astrophysicists and,
and by proxy a Saul to the universe
are sacred places to scientist.
Okay. Now, it's not sacred in a religious sense, but it's sacred in a,
in terms of a pathway to knowing and understanding who and what we are in this
universe.
Okay.
We place great value on that. So, but it's not our land.
It's we, you know,
[inaudible] Europeans didn't come to Hawaii and find fine legions of scientists.
They are conducting experiments. Okay.
They found native peoples governing themselves. So, so,
so that's that the consequence,
if it gets voted down and that's permanent and there's no way around that,
that telescope is still going to be built. It just won't be built in Hawaii.
Well, where will it be built? They have to be built on mountaintops. Yeah.
So there are other mountaintops, yeah. You want to be above, you know,
some schmaltzy clouds and haze and,
and you want a dry environment so there's less rain, fewer clouds. Oh,
you've visited very good. Uh, more than 10 years ago. The first time.
And it was, I got very fortunate.
It was a night where the moon was not out. Yes.
Moon is not the astronomers favorite thing. Yeah. You want the darkest sky.
You can. We were worried as we were driving up there, that was really cloudy.
But we drove through the clouds and you got to the top and we got to the
observatory and it was the most amazing without telescopes, just we,
there was telescopes there, but without telescopes.
It was the most amazing view of this guy I'd ever seen in my life.
And it changed my perspective of our place in the universe. This is what we do.
We're on a space ship,
like we were flying through the universe because of the diffused lighting in on
the big island because it's all set up so that it doesn't ruin what they're
trying to accomplish at the CAC. Reflections in the wrong place.
Not only that, if there was a moon out and you did ascend up through the clouds,
the moonlight illuminates the clouds and you are an island in the middle of
white cotton. Yeah. And you're not even connected to the earth.
It's what you imagined Mount Olympus would've been.
I've been out there for them when that happens too,
with the gods up there and there's kind of, that's their place. It's there. So,
so, so yes. And so any my,
my brethren, my fellow astrophysicist who have also observed from mountaintops,
by the way, it's becoming a lost art because it's not lost,
but it's becoming something we don't do anymore.
There's something called surface observing where you put in your observing
program and it gets handed to a technician at the telescope who point the
telescope, gets the data and sends it back to you.
So the next generation doesn't have the experience that my generation did
because there was a pilgrimage to the top of the mountain and you converted your
life's path. You've converted your life schedule to become nocturnal.
And in so doing you, you know this is,
the journey was long enough because you're in the middle of nowhere.
Now you've got to go nocturnal. And by the time you're ready for this,
you are communing with the cosmos. It is you, the detector,
the telescope and the universe.
And there's an eerie silence up there too, cause you don't hear any,
you do the hum of maybe the, the draw the motor of the telescope. But that's it.
And so, so all I'm saying is if they choose to not have it,
that telescope will go somewhere else. One of them is the Canary Islands.
These are also volcanic. Um,
hilltops not as high as as Mount of Kenya is at 14,000 feet.
By the way,
I should have checked at what temperature water boils at the top of Mount of k.
We could have rounded that story out. Uh, but, um,
I think it's around 180 degrees actually. Uh,
I think I did actually calculate it one time, but anyhow, so,
so you'd find a mountaintop and we'll put it somewhere else and the data won't
be as good. Um,
but that'll be a consequence of it and none of that'll go to Hawaii.
How do you think that's going to get resolved though, if you had to guess?
I don't know. Um, I, uh, I,
I just don't know. A lot of people are against it, including
Jason Momoa Aqua Mans against it. Oh, he's out there protesting. Yeah.
And so when you get celebrity types to put the weight of their name behind it,
it magnifies the cause of others. Even if they're in the minority.
And so I, like I said, I think native should I,
has it been, does everyone know who all the natives are? Is there,
is there some listing so that they can all vote for this one thing you wouldn't
want people voting who are not native if you're voting on whether it's so
sacred, you don't want to put a telescope there. You'd want people who have a,
a, an indigenous, um,
an indigenous concern for what goes on there.
And Indigenous in reference to Hawaii is relative. Every,
every usage of the word indigenous is relative,
especially with Hawaii because I mean the only indigenous people are black
people in Africa. That's okay because life,
human life began in Africa. Everyone else traveled to where they were.
So, so native, it's,
you set a timeframe to declare what is native and what's not.
And a native in its, in its simplest form is, are you born there?
So I'm a native New Yorker. I'm born there,
but I wasn't the original settler there. I,
with my species did not form on Manhattan Island.
So everybody traveled to where they are.
They just got there before the Europeans.
And so that has become the definition of indigenous art.
Were you there when the Europeans landed? Then you're indigenous,
but to other life forms on that, on that rock, on that, uh, um,
uh, Hawaii's or a volcanic, it's a volcanic, um, archipelago.
Um, uh, you know how that happens. By the way,
you have all these multiple volcanoes in our story, in a string,
you have a wonder why, how that happens. Sure. You did wonder what you do.
You know why? Oh,
because there's a hotspot beneath Earth's crust and it's just sitting there.
Okay. And when you're beneath,
there's crushed stuff doesn't move around the way it does on Earth's crust.
Earth's crust shifts. Okay?
So that hotspot gurgles up makes a volcano, then the hotspot goes dormant.
But the con, this shelf still drifts. You still have continental drift,
so drifts. Then the hotspots says, time for me to Gurgle again. A girl is up.
Now you get another volcano, and then it goes dormant.
That volcano goes dormant. It shifts. You get another one.
Anytime you see a chain of islands jet guarantee,
they're made by volcanoes.
Over enough time for continental shift two it's shifted the plates over the
hotspot of Earth's mantle.
So do you think what they're concerned with is the eventual spoiling of this
beautiful natural resource that slowly but surely people are putting up houses
there and developments and all these different things.
And then the scientists are saying,
we need this sacred land because we're going to put a volcano. And they're like,
look, this is already, there's already a, I mean,
we're going to put a telescope, there's already a telescope up here. Enough.
You think that's what it is?
They're trying to halt the progress of civilization or, I mean,
maybe progress is a bad word. The expansion of civilization.
Yeah. I mean, let's go back. What did Teddy Roosevelt two he said,
we've got to preserve these lands because they're beautiful. And by the way,
he said that after he shot all those elephants and tigers and Lions and tigers
and bears. Yeah, I mean, I, I, I hail from a museum,
the American Museum of natural history where he's the patron saint of that
museum.
What happened was he realizes how important this land is and how beautiful it
is. And he is the, he's the patron saint of the national park system.
So, so that's the secular version of sacred,
right? We don't say it's sacred,
but we've all decided as a community that we care about these lands.
And you don't want to drill on it. You don't want to put housing. Um,
was it Lyndon Johnson's wife, Lady Bird Johnson,
who said our freeways that were so carefully building after the Second World
War, the Eisenhower freeway project. Okay. Hi. You know,
the interstate system is, uh, this is our country.
We want to keep it beautiful. So certain stretches over it.
There are no billboards. Billboards would, you know, um,
would change your relationship to nature.
So certain stretches of interstate or secularly sacred,
if, if I can say that. So I remember visiting, uh, uh,
visiting Australia, and there's the, the famous rock and the, um,
out in the outback. Uh, the old,
old Leura Ulu please help me get the,
I get my correct pronunciation of this. W O Uluru
[inaudible] I'm told it's one coherent geologic rock.
It's not just an assembly of rocks.
And so I don't know enough about the geology of it,
but I do know that the Australian aborigines will room and okay.
Iconic Red Rock, look at that cool thing. Okay.
So that is one sort of geologic thing.
And uh, and climbers want a climate about it. That's cute.
It's miles in circumference. OK. So I, we visited it. I,
I rented a bicycle with my wife and kids and we rode around it. Okay.
So now, um,
that is sacred to the local indigenous peoples.
So they don't want you to climb on it. Well, on a rock climber, I, you know,
what do you care? I'm not going to ruin it. I'm not going to,
they don't want you to climb on it. And I try to think to myself,
is there a counterpart to this that would sort of wake up a Westerner to say,
I get it right?
Not Suppose some people from sub natives from Alaska or from the,
some tribes from Africa or some aborigines came up from these remote places of
the world, walked up to the Vatican and said,
we want to climb the walls of this Vatican just for sport. What would we say?
We want to climb the walls of St Paul's Cathedral in downtown London.
What would you say? No. Yeah, but are those comparable? I mean, wait, wait,
wait. We want to repel down the tower of Big Ben.
You're going to say no. Get the fuck are you would say no,
these are important structures to us.
Now are you going to say or the equivalent? Well,
we built those and the natives didn't build the rock. Right? Exactly.
Okay. It depends on how important that detail is to you.
All I'm saying is on the level of weeks, say this is sacred.
You say that is sacred
and now you're going to have different rules for who's climbing. What.
I think it'll force force you to take pause. So here's an argument in pho,
like supporting what you're saying, look at what's going on with the Himalayas.
I mean it's the human shit that they ha they leave behind their all the clients.
So disturbing the climbers. It's horrible. It's really horrible.
I mean they, there's tons of it. Tons of human waste. Okay,
so what you do there is if it's still not a problem that people are climbing,
it's that they're leaving waste. You don't stop the climbers,
you tax them at some level so that now you have cleanup crews that come up after
them. Yeah, but it's your solution. No, it's incredibly good.
So there you go. You're all texting them. You make it worth it. All right,
so you understand like here's what I'm saying to leave the bodies up there,
right. You know that they can't. That's what I heard. That's what I heard. Well,
why do you think they could bring tons of shit when they can't even bring
bodies? Here's what I'm saying.
When they invented cars and cars were killing people in the street,
cause people that know how to cross the street,
they didn't know where to cross the street.
People don't know how to stop the cars. They say, well,
cars are actually a pretty useful thing. Do we ban cars? No. We make stoplights.
Oh, people across [inaudible] we make crosswalks. Oh,
let's put lanes so the cars don't hit each other and let's make airbags so that
you don't fly through the windshield. All right,
so there are ways around problems.
If you value the thing that it is that you want to do,
so people are leaving crap up there.
You make them bring it back or you develop a system that enables the stuff to
come back no matter what,
and if you can't do that and you don't want it messed up,
then cancel the whole operation. We didn't cancel cars.
We got really innovative about how to keep them a big difference between cars
and human shit that's left from the side of the mountain.
I think the real problem too is I think it's you value mountain climbing and you
want to keep doing it. Then you solve the problem. This is what engineers do.
That's all they do is what's your problem? Solve it.
Being able to bring those bodies back because the physical limitations of the
human body, it's barely, you barely have enough juice to climb.
It's so thin. The air so thin, it's so dangerous.
The energy draw on you is so high. Leave those bodies there.
So is that the human shit that you're talking about or is that Oh, there's that.
You're talking about the fact that humans were there that we got when we were
not very clean about our presence. That's what you're talking about, right?
We're just being human. We have to go and you gotta go. You gotta go.
When we got to go up there and just open up the hatch and let her rip down the
side of a mountain and the resulting, do you know what in the space station,
they recycle your urine and your and your crap.
Congratulations to them because they had put engineers on the problem.
What I mean by Sakhalin,
they extract all the water from it and then what's left is highly dried and you
drink mineral water is water. It's water molecule. That's the thing about,
by the way, by the way, every glass you see this People's pee is in it.
That's correct. So you got a bought a bottle of water here. Okay.
This has napoleons. Yes, yes.
There are more molecules of water in this bottle.
Then there are bottles of water.
This volume of order in all the world's oceans. So in other words,
if you drank this and peed it out, okay,
you have enough molecules in your pee and your sweat and in the,
the moisture that you exhale, all that goes back into the environment,
scattering into all sources of water or the world.
And there's enough of those molecules to occupy every half liter of water that
fit, that covers the surface of this earth. So that given enough time,
you scoop a cup of water out of there. I don't even care if you filter it.
The h two o is still there.
That is water that is passed through the kidneys of Abraham Lincoln.
Gangas Kahn, Joan of arc. [inaudible].
Yeah,
Socrates. Plato. No, Jesus.
Can I get a bottle of Jesus? I'm trying to get my,
my bill and Ted's excellent adventure list. Go in here. Okay.
You just ruined it. But yes, Jesus would be included in that. So would Socrates.
Yes. So that is the same. By the way, the same is true with breaths of air.
There were more molecules of air in every breath you take,
then there are breaths of air in all the atmosphere of the earth.
So when you exhale, there's enough of those molecules to scatter. And the, the,
the,
the air currents will do this to scatter into every breath of air that is
inhale. So when you take a breath of air,
you have molecules of air that went through the lungs of Jesus.
Okay.
We're all connected and there's no way around it.
And the water that we have is the water that we have, right? We drink it,
we pee, it goes to the atmosphere. It comes down as rain. Yeah. And the rain is,
is an important differences. A lot.
Most of the water on earth is salt water that you can't drink. Right.
And there's a limited amount that's fresh water. How much of a, by the way,
all the glaciers are freshwater cause that's frozen rain, right? Frozen rain.
Here's something that no one talks about. When the glaciers melt,
where does the water go? Where's it go? Just tell me, you know the answer just
in the ocean. Back in the ocean. Okay,
so but this is now non salty water going into the ocean.
So you're mixing fresh water with brackish water and they occupied different
places in the vertical profile of the ocean.
And because salt water is heavier than fresh water,
so the freshwater occupies the top right.
It's not as salty as the water at the below.
And there are circulations in the ocean, not only up and down,
you know, northern latitude, southern latitude like the Gulf stream.
There's also circulation top to bottom.
And the combinations of all these circulations create the stability of the
ocean. If you disrupt that, oh my gosh, they're animals.
Fishes that can't live anymore where they used to be because the salt level is
different. And so some animals might go extinct,
some weather patterns will change because the ocean affects climate.
So these are,
this is why climate modeling is so critical yet so complicated.
Is it because there are a lot of variables that show up?
Why can't we take the salt out of the water? You can, it just takes energy.
You can do it. But why hasn't that been being done? You can't.
You have to ask you who's paying for the energy?
Where are you getting the energy from? It's an energy thing,
but I would think that would be very valuable.
Let me think about how many people just not valuable enough yet.
That's the point. Well, is it that it's just, it's just money, dude.
It's just money. You can ask, what does it cost to ship a uh,
a half pint of water from Fiji? Okay.
Whatever hell is the square bottle that you buy in Fiji Water? Is it Fiji?
Right? Fiji water. What does it cost to bottle that in Fiji?
Ship it here relative to desalinating the ocean.
It's cheaper to ship. Like to Fiji. There'll be a day when that's not the case.
And future wars are going to be fought over who has access to fresh water.
And the value of water will go up. And by the way,
the value of water in space is $10,000 a pound.
So if you, if you last do a comment and you say this is a lot of freshwater,
uh yeah, you could, I guess you can bring it back down to earth,
but that's expensive.
You're better off selling it to NASA for $9,000 a pound cause it cost them
$10,000 a pound to put water into orbit.
So you better off keeping it up there and somehow or another,
if you harness water in space, you're better off trading in space with it.
Then bringing it back down to a planetary surface at the moment,
the economics favor that. What is the desalination process? So it's,
it's simple. You just evaporate the water. It's basically a still, it's, it's,
it's, it's, it's, it's a distillery, right? So here's, here's a,
a pocket of water with this highly salty and you just heat it.
The H two o evaporates leaving sodium chloride behind.
And at the end you get this salt deposit at the bottom of your dish at the
bottom of your vessel. Oh wait a minute.
What happens to lakes that used to be there that salty lakes that used to be
there that aren't? There's a salt deposit.
That's the source of our modern day salt. This is what I tweeted the other day.
That all table salt is, is um,
all table salt is sea salt. It just came from long buried, uh,
prehistoric evaporated seas.
So salt mines and, and I was,
I was told by some geologists I had,
I had had a narrow and narrow usage of the word mind when I think for mine,
I think of a hole in the ground.
But mining operations includes surface operations as well.
So there's surface lakes that are,
that have evaporated and you get salt from that as well as the mines that you
would dig down deep below. So that whole, all of that is a mining operation.
My tweet only referenced the buried ones, but the,
it's all but it's all from evaporated waters. It's all from evaporates.
It's all sea salt is the point. Now,
nuclear power plants rely on steam, right?
Isn't that part of the [inaudible] just to finish the point.
So you evaporate the water and the salt left.
Maybe you wouldn't want to use that and make some sea salt out of it.
Table Salt. Um,
and that evaporated water condenses out over here and that is distilled order
right now.
You might want to mineralize it so it tastes good cause distilled water doesn't
taste good. Plus it's not really healthy to drink it. As you probably know,
you drink distilled water, it goes into equilibrium with your minerals,
sucking minerals out of you so it has the same minerality that your body does
and then you pee it out and you'll systematically drain yourself of important
electrolytes.
So generally the water that you would say tastes good and you enjoy has some
mineral, um, bits, some, some, some kind of mineral, um,
minerals in it. That'll nuclear power plants, don't they?
The process is using that nuclear energy to create steam to operate turbines.
And basically all of our electricity today comes from uh,
essentially the,
mostly electricity's coming from turbines that convert steam to electricity.
So, so sorry. So you heat water,
the water back steam the steam turns the turbine and the turning turbine
generates the electricity, isn't it? So, so, so it's,
it's a matter of where do you get the energy to boil the water.
That's what it comes down. Is it coal? Is it oil? Is it, is it nukes?
Is it wind, is it hydro? All of this.
If you get a hydro plant, oh by the way,
in a hydro plant they don't have to make steam because they have the water,
the water pressure at the base of the dam moves through the turbines that turns
the turbines and they make electricity so you don't have to heat anything cause
they have the water pressure to do that. Anyway,
that is also solar power by the way,
because the sun evaporated ocean water,
the water lifts up, becomes a cloud. The cloud moves over ground over the land.
The cloud rains into the lake that is above the dam.
So the energy that got the water up there in the first place is all solar,
so you should think of hydroelectric has solar as well as wind energy because
wind is the uneven,
unequal heating of air on earth's surface and that creates air currents.
That's also solar power.
There's also this all solar isn't inconceivable that you could come up with a
combination of desalination and power plant where you're using the heat to
combine, you know,
to make the turbines move and then you steam it off and that's where you get the
water from. That would be a good,
that's an interesting idea and I don't know how much that's been thought about.
What you're saying is I'm making steam anyway. Yeah. So why don't I do it.
Suck with soap and water out and make,
that's a nice two for one kind of thing. Three for one.
You get salt and you get salt out the other side.
Get salt gets all you freshwater,
fresh water and you generate electricity. Yeah. It's a dude patented. No,
I'm, it's free for anybody who wants it. Go take that and run with it.
I have high hopes for title energy cause there's certain places on earth where
tides are very powerful and they're very,
and you just put some paddles in the air and you'd sort of end it.
And it works both ways when the water comes in and out. No,
this is battery technology.
That's the reason why la is and completely dependent upon solar because it seems
like this is the spot to do it. Like it never rains.
I mean if it rains here 50 days a year, that's crazy. Or any desert. Right.
And we're, we're next door to the Mojave desert. Right. So,
so one of the problems is, and by the way, the deserts are,
are generally localized to certain latitudes on earth.
It's because of general circulation on earth. So, uh,
the air pockets on earth, there's a lot going on earth.
The air moves into a lot of ways, but there's a,
there's an overriding strict relation of air that has air sort of rising up at
the equator. Imagine a cylindrical movement of air that,
that girds the earth. Okay. So just above the equator,
you have a cylinder rotating where you have air rising and just below the
equator you have a cylinder rotating the opposite, um, weight.
So that air is still rising at the equator. Okay? So air rise at the equator,
it's unstable, it makes clouds the equators one is the cloudiest place on earth,
practically one of the cloudiest places. Well,
how about the other side of those cylinders where the air descends?
Okay. Okay. When you have descending air, you don't make clouds.
Well, how big is the cylinder? It's about 30 degrees of latitude wide.
So you're rainiest places on earth or at the equator.
That's where you get the Amazon rain forest and the lake and you're dry.
As places on earth are 30 degrees north and 30 degrees south
because the cylindrical movements of air have descending air there.
So the Mojave desert, the Sahara desert, the Gobi desert,
they're all around 30 degrees north latitude.
So this,
so we live on the surface of the earth where there are forces operating that are
so much bigger than us that we don't even think about it.
Why is an India would be a desert? Because it's right in that zone.
We're not for the seasonal, um, monsoons.
It doesn't rain much in India except when it's monsoon season.
So the monsoon is sort of the exception to what would otherwise happen there.
And that's why everyone loves the monsoon and they hate it, but they love it.
It cools the weather. They get sources of water. There it is.
So to ask you the question again, oh, did I not answer it? Sorry. Oh, so, so,
so battery technology, like what, why isn't La completely solar?
It should be, it's not. Some of it is cost.
La is so car heavy. Right? And plus,
you know the,
there's a Lamborghini passing me at 20 miles an hour on the four oh five.
This was the land of wasted horsepower. Right?
So any place that has a lot of sunlight should be thriving on solar panels.
And you guys aren't, I looked around, very few have very few homes,
have solar panels and I don't fully understand that. Um, you could,
if you did that, then you'd run your own runoff, your own power.
You can do this, you can do the equation difficult by the way. And so,
so, um, yeah, I mean the price might have to come down a little further.
You don't really see the full price of oil. It's uh,
it's subsidized in ways that are not obvious to us. You know,
we built the roads with our taxes so that car companies could sell you a car
that you drove on the road that they, that was built for them.
If they have to build all their own roads,
the price of gas to go in the car would have been much higher.
The price of your car would have been,
all of that would have been much higher if the car companies had to do it.
What I'm saying is I make a product and I want you to use it,
but there's no roads. Oh,
I convinced you to build the road so you can buy my car and drive on that road.
That's a weird way of looking, but it's a way, it's, it's full cost accounting.
It's full cost accounting. What is the cost of coal?
It's how many people died of lung disease of new monorail?
Ultra microscopic silicone. Campbell County Osis. Okay.
That's the longest word in the, in the random house dictionary. Yeah.
That's basically black long. Yes. Basically black line. But you can break it up.
The new Mono Ultra Microscopic Silico,
which the a silicate in a Kennel, Connie osis.
So there's all medical um,
bits except stapled together to make that word. So,
so what is the cost to their health? Their death.
They're the air quality asthma.
The total cost of oil is not what you pay at the gas tank.
It's other things that we shell out that are not realized in the actual cost of
that source of energy.
If you full cost accounted what all this really costs,
then the solar option would look way better than it does relative to it.
That's all I'm telling you when you're talking about cars and car manufacturers
having to pay for roads isn't that, they didn't say phones,
isn't that like restaurants having to pay for toilet paper? No.
Restaurants going.
Restaurants have to pay for land that you would park your car on
to go into the restaurant. Not In New York City,
but in places where everybody has cars. If you don't have valet parking, I,
my restaurant will not occupy the entire plot of land I just bought.
It's going to be some,
it's going to be a fourth of that land and all the rest are going to be parking
spots.
I have absorbed the cost of your parking your car in me in my acquisition of
that, of that real estate, for example,
to make it convenient so that people could use your facility. Correct. So,
but I bore that cost as as restaurant tour. Right?
Or maybe I'm renting of course. But that's, that's, it's not relate to someone,
the car manufacturers being forced to pay for the roads that they should be.
That would have been interesting had they because then it would have changed the
pricing of everything. But why would they be,
are you going to make a car and no one has a road to drive it on?
[inaudible] it's what, it's your responsibility then you don't have a business.
But don't you want a car? Yes. So we all agree cars are good,
they move fast, they get you where you want to go. Right.
So how do we as a society make it easier for people to get where they want to go
while we all chip in and we make roads,
it's not entirely before there were cars, cars, nobody is thinking, you know,
I want to go to Chicago tomorrow and I'll be back on Thursday.
No one is even having that thought for their email. No one was thinking,
I'm going to send you an email. These are not thoughts.
So I'm just talking about all the forces that had to align to make it actually
work. Okay, so now what's holding back electric cars? Well,
I might not be able to charge it.
It takes a little too long to charge compared to my other vehicle.
Are there enough chargers along the way? Well,
these were questions that were asked when people got cars.
If I have cars and it tastes gas, is there a gas station? Oh, standard all says,
we'll put a gas station there because you're buying cars.
And so it's a whole family of businesses coming together and you're paying for a
big part of that. It's not just the car you paid for the roads.
So I'm saying I'm not complaining about it. I'm just describing it as a reality.
I get it.
I just didn't understand the comparison to car manufacturers paying for that.
They say, if I make a car and I want you to buy my car, I need a road.
So I'm going to build the road. Oh wait a minute.
I convinced you to build a road that's even better. Oh my gosh.
I made it a national priority. Oh, it's a security problem. We need a,
we need a military design interstate system.
That's what the interstates, military,
that's why it goes through mountains instead of over them.
That's why they're long stretches of straightaway so you can land an airplane on
it. That's why they're built above the road.
That's why the surface roads are not the same thing as highways.
Cause I always are not on the surface. Why? Because they built up why?
Cause tanks can drive on them without decomposing the road.
What specs did we put this to? To the Autobahn.
The Germans invented the modern highway system. They invented the cloverleaf,
they invented the off-ramps.
They invented all of that and their armies could move on their roads like it was
nobody's business. And Eisenhower said, Hey, I'll get me some of that. He comes,
this is probably not how he said it, I'm guessing,
but he comes over convinces us all that we need to build an internist.
I got nothing against the interstate system.
I'm just giving you the foundational facts for it. And by the way,
the interstate system costs as much as going to the moon,
about a hundred billion dollars in total cost.
It seems like a bargain compared to how many people use it versus having to
watch the moon. And it grows the economy that has a lot of, a lot of, um,
but basically it was sold as a, as,
as a security need because if you're at war,
you need to move material and personnel and you might have to land an airplane,
um, uh, in an emergency way. And so all freeways do this.
You're going to crash a plane, do it on a freeway happens. Yeah,
but do it cause you might land safely. And if you don't land safely,
the road comes to you to get to the hospital. Don't crash in a forest.
We can't get to you. Right? You can't get emergency vehicles. Could call,
you know, uh,
if you've seen this new Porsche has a new electric vehicle that is about to
release in the evolutionary, groundbreaking technologies. What's allowed,
what's groundbreak charge much faster.
You could charge up to 80% in 20 minutes because a,
it's double the well, pull up, pull up the, uh, information.
Was it wattage or amperage? Well, just, just a couple of things.
Different battery. You can't cheat physics, so, so yeah,
some batteries charge faster than others.
But w what's what really drives the charging speed of battery is the,
is the voltage over which you charge the battery and [inaudible] it goes as the
square of the voltage, right? So supercharger,
so if you charge a,
an electric car in your 120 volt home electricity,
it could take 30 hours. If you go to 240 volts, okay.
It'll take, you know, 10 hours.
If you go to 384 volts, you keep going up.
That drops precipitously and you can get a voltage where the thing will charge
in a few couple hours. Yeah. We have a supercharger here.
We do set up here for my Tesla. So there you go.
Which Tesla has quickly the s yes. Yeah. Cool. Yeah, so,
so you'll charge it in at most 90 minutes?
I don't think they call it that anymore. I think they out superchargers. No,
there's the Tesla, I think they call it a like they have like an s raven.
They have, did they call it the s anymore? Now? It's not the p one under d.
That's the, that's the height battery capacity. Okay. Now they,
I think they have it based on whether it's a single engine or double engine.
They've simplified things,
also removed all the labels to make it a little slicker. Sleeker.
So did in the porch, is it just they pull it up,
they're selling a higher voltage charger to you or is it the battery?
So completely different. Google 10 interesting things about the new pours.
Ty can, how'd he say a tie can. That's the article I was reading today.
So that's cool.
So my concern is batteries are still kind of 19th century technology. Yeah.
You know, invented the battery Volta. Alexandra Volta. Oh, that makes sense.
Cool. Yeah. Voltage Volvo's volts come from him.
[inaudible] yeah, yeah. All these guys got, you know, they got famous. So Tesla,
we got a car named after him. The guy had it now has a card.
There's actually a unit of electromagnetism named after Nikola Tesla. Yeah.
It's a webers per square meter, I think.
So. It's like the,
the density of magnetic field strength within a certain area through,
through a surface. So batteries are charged by an inductive plate.
The conventional tress ports claims that the Porsche Turbo charging system
charges at 350,000 watts kilowatts in 15 minutes.
80% in just 15 minutes. Oh, that's cool.
It's not clear how various shit will prevent battery overheating.
Maybe they are all good luck bitch. So it could be vaporware, but we'll see.
But they've already been done it. Well, but it's game on.
That's what that means. Yes, it's game on whether it works or not.
It's like people Tesla's on notice. Everybody's on notice. Yeah. Oh my gosh,
I'm going to lose market share because people want to buy an electric car.
And so you didn't want something that's going to charge fast.
And that's the number one complaint that most people have over electric cars.
Will you find a way to, okay, so that's one way.
But another way is you find a way to swap batteries as quickly as in less time
that it takes to fill a tank. You know,
how much time do you stand there with your hand on the nozzle waiting for the
gas to go in? Right.
So they would have to have a mountain of battery sitting there and waiting for
people to just come in and does it any worse than a mountain that, than a,
than a sunken reservoir tank of gas. There's no different.
Why is that any different? Probably be larger volume, right? Possibly.
But so what if it's economic? You just do it.
And if the battery's all at the bottom of the car and you go like NASCAR,
you run in, pop it up, take out the battery, put the next one,
you're off. Do you think that's the future? Why not?
It's better than charging the battery. You don't have a car idea. I know I do.
[inaudible] yeah, I do have cars now. I didn't use to, I didn't use to,
it's expensive as hell to garage it in New York. They just went up.
The price just went up. The big,
the big price point of that was when did the average cost to garage a car for a
month in New York in Manhattan equal the average cost of a two bedroom home in
the United States. And we've passed that cost of rent. Let's see.
So cost more. It was like $600 a month or something to rent a parking spot.
Do you rent a parking spot, right? One spot, one spot a month per month.
And You can rent the home in many places in the suburbs somewhere for $600 a
car. You drive. So I now have a Tesla. Yeah. So I, I, I, I ponied up,
they're expensive by the way. I'm sorry. Yeah. So I have the x,
so that's my sort of utility vehicle. The x is the SUV, uh,
very high acceleration as you know. And um, but yeah, I, there's,
there's no maintenance on it, right? There was no oil change. There was no,
you know, the only moving part is the, what'd you turn in the wheels with,
right. [inaudible] no pistons, nothing. So, you know,
cars really should've been this a hundred years ago and then we would've had a a
hundred years of clever engineering to perfect that.
You ever see the documentary who killed the electric car? No, I haven't,
but I know about it and I know some of the background story behind it and the
electric car was one of the first ones because electricity was all the rage a
hundred years ago. It's electrify the cities this days. There's Edison,
there's tasks. Everybody wants to do everything electric.
And the car had just come out, let's do it. Electric.
So this was not a new concept and it's unfortunate that more sort of innovative
thinkers hadn't been brought to task on how to perfect the electric car.
Speaking of Tesla and electricity,
what did you think about Tesla's initial idea that Westinghouse shot down to
sort of broadcast electricity so that people could just pull it out of the air?
Yeah, so the people in
the Nicola Tesla Fan Club somehow feel that he got wronged in his life. Okay.
And surely some of that is true with regard to his business acumen and patents
and, and who owns the patent and who does, does he have good business sense?
Is he as savvy or as, as sneaky,
whatever other words you might apply to Edison. Right. So I get that.
But his contributions to electromagnetism are real and recognized in the world
of physics. Like I said, there's a unit of electromagnetism named after him,
so don't come crying to me. Say he was not recognized by my people. Okay.
He's recognized,
he had some ideas that were a little out there and out there on a level where
it almost certainly would have not worked. And here's why.
Okay. Um,
electromagnetic energy is communicating between us. I see you.
That's cause visible light is reflecting off of your scalp. Okay?
To me, it's reflecting off of my nose. Back to you.
You can ask how much energy is in that. Well, not much.
There's not much energy in a visible light. Photons,
if you stay there long enough, you might feel a little warmth where I'm at,
but no, you're not going to drive a car with that energy.
You're not going to run a motor with it. Okay, well, of what good is it? Oh,
you know what we found? We can use electromagnetic radio waves,
which are the lowest form of electromagnetic energy,
lowest energy level of all of our life. We can trade away.
It's not to transmit energy. That's not the point of it.
The point is to transmit information and information became what?
Characterize the modern era,
and that's why in the 1950s and sixties when everyone is imagining flying cars
and motorized sidewalks,
everything is running on energy because they're thinking energy is going to be
free in the future.
But what they didn't figure was that information would be free or easy to
transmit and to generate and to store and to,
to delete and whereas the energy that would take to move things and to drive
things, that would be a problem. No one saw that coming. Nobody saw that coming.
So as your photons get higher and higher energy, yes,
you can start doing things with them. You get x-rays and gamma rays,
but that's not what Tesla was referring to.
He was talking about moving radio waves through the space that would charge
things up.
You can't pack sufficient energy in your radio wave to do anything we need to do
mechanically, currently, currently. Well back then,
would it be sufficient?
There might've been something you could have done with your radio waves because
the needs were no, but that no snow, I take that back.
That was the height of the industrial revolution.
That was the age of the machine. The age of the giant turbines.
Radio energy is not touching that right,
but wasn't it possible that he was considering it for things like radios or
light bulbs or household items?
What would it be possible to use that power for that. So now what?
So what happens? So the radio waves,
if you had enough power and radio waves to generate a light bulb to power a
light bulb,
well how through the air are you standing in the way of this?
This energy has pathways.
We now send energy through wires because you're not standing in the way of the
wire. The wire is buried, the wire has insulation, [inaudible] high suspension.
You want to move it through the air and you want to walk around like no,
that's not how that works.
But I've heard people moving enough energy through the air to power something
that itself could kill you.
The energy powering through the moving through the air could kill you unless
you, you bring a little bit amount and then you store it and then use it later.
You could do it that way. Sure. Some sort of batteries.
Yes you need a storage system,
but you would still probably have some sort of residual effect of having this
stuff broadcast through the air and who knows what it would do to human health.
If you needed that much energy. Right now,
the energy to transmit information is so low that it know it has no effect on
your health. That's why I can pull out my cell phone. I'm in a brick.
This fake brick that's fake brick.
I'm in a building that knows and I notice it is. Go touch it.
I don't believe you. Go ahead. That was a real bricks. Go touch the bricks man.
Jesus Christ thinks we got fake bricks. Who Do you think we are?
Oh you got it. Thought it was a liar. How weird. Now let me be honest here.
So, so it's a veneer. A brick veneer. Okay. It's the whole day thing.
Got Real building. It's not structural.
Brick sliced the end of bricks and then the mortar it in and everything. Okay,
so, so we're both right. It's real. It's real brick, but it's not structural.
[inaudible] brick. So here I am real fake. So we're inside.
I can pull on my cell phone and have a phone call. Yes.
These are microwaves of a frequency that can penetrate walls,
send information to my cell phone,
and I can communicate using information and not have that energy kill me.
But it's not enough to power the actual, it is not enough to power the device.
Correct. So antisocial, intentional Teslas,
everyone is thinking he's got the solution to the future transmission of energy.
No, he doesn't. Well, I don't think anyone's saying that,
but what he does and his fans do. But back then there were no computers.
Back then. There were no television, but we did have machines.
It was the era of the big machine. Right.
But I don't think he was insinuating that you could use,
I don't know what he wanted to power.
I don't know what he would have powered with it,
if not light bulbs and other things. You know,
one thing you brought up that's really interesting.
You saw talked about light reflecting off of things.
Are you aware that BMW painted a, they painted one of their cars.
Vantaa black. I saw this is jet black. Yes. I saw you saw one recently black.
So light can bounce off of it. Right.
So not only hint drive it cause people won't be able to see it at night.
They're literally saying like this is just the theoretical.
I mean like what would you want to do? You can align it with the image of it.
Cause I saw one in a parking lot. It's fuck, it's very bad. You saw a real life.
That's not what I saw. I saw a sportscar version saw Vantaa black car.
They have the, I saw a sports car that was,
there was not this the car you have up the, I don't know what that is. What?
I saw a BMW that they painted vantive black. Okay,
well then the best black is available. I'm on there.
Badass low to the ground sports car.
And so I know it's not available commercially. What do you want me to say?
I'm saying that for BMW it's not, it's not something they're off. I'm an La,
you have all your cars here and everything showcased here. What?
I didn't see it in New York. I saw it here in la. Well I'm sure.
So maybe it wasn't a BMW. Maybe somebody else did. And I'm just saying BMW.
If someone did it, BMW didn't make it themselves. Okay. Someone must have done,
I mean you can do it. It's a real thing. Vantaa black. Okay.
So one of the principles of stealth is that if you send a signal to it,
it never comes back to you.
So you have no sort of radar measure of existence.
Correct. But there are two ways you can do that.
One of them is you cannot reflect back. Okay.
But so by absorbing it, right. Okay,
so jet matte black will absorb it and not reflected back.
But if there's enough energy coming at it, it will heat up.
Cause you can't get something for nothing here. It'll heat up the skin of that.
And it could be bad for the occupants. That's what they said about the yard.
The article about Vanta Block. If you put that in the desert, forget it.
Well they were saying even in Los Angeles, so hot. Exactly.
So another way to do it is the signal comes to me and I reflect it in a
direction that is not back to you.
So the B two bomber is not only non-reflective back to you,
it takes the signal and reflects it and double bounces it so that all your
energy gets sent in other directions and knocked back to you.
So it doesn't then keep the energy that was sent to it.
So that's another way to do it. Another,
there's another stealth which was featured in one of the recent,
not recent four years ago. James Bond movies where light that comes at it,
the light that's behind it goes around it coherently and continues to come
towards you so that you think you're seeing what's behind it and it's not there.
You are seeing what's behind it.
But the path of that light when around the vessel and continued on its way to
you. So you think you're just seeing the grass in the tree,
but there's a car sitting right there. You don't know about this technology?
No. Right now it exists only for very, a look up, a stealth, um,
light ray stuff.
And so the material has to be able to know what is behind it.
And you're saying small objects [inaudible] no, no, no.
Only with that only works in one sight line.
Whereas if you needed functional stealth,
everybody looking at it should be every path,
every sightline two.
It should be able to see what's behind it on the other side of that side,
the way it reflects things. No, it doesn't. Yeah. It's,
it carries the light beam around it and sends it out the other side.
You able to find it? Yeah. Yeah. But you have,
is it like a solid block in a person who's looking at it and you see their eye
out the other side? It's really freaky. That's a future of stealth.
What are your thoughts on digital privacy? What do you mean? Well,
like phones, you know, like phones.
Like do you ever talk to someone about something and then you see it in your
Google feed? Do you see ads? Uh, yeah. So, uh,
we don't, I mean I haven't researched this, but uh,
my wife tell her we were once gifted one of these, you know,
what do you call those things that you talk to whoever the Google one is,
is that Alexa goes home, Google at home. No, Alexis is Amazon, right?
So was Google at home and she says, don't turn that on. I said, why not?
Cause they'll be listening and I didn't believe her at first.
And then I started hearing stories and so I, so I don't have one, but it's not,
cause I know that it's listening or not listening. Substantiated.
I mean actual set up.
They have apologized for actual human contractors listening in to conversations
that people have had, having sex, having arguments. Like it's real.
Yeah. I that seems like it should be a problem. So what's your question to me?
What am I all for it or am I, what's your question? No, my question is,
one of the things that you're getting out of their ability to scan things is
they're tailoring things to your liking. Like, you know,
like your phone tells you it's 22 minutes until you get home. I get it.
And you're like, bitch, how do you know where I live? Exactly.
I didn't tell you where I live. I got it. Here it is. Um,
and I'm just old fashioned about this. Okay.
I'm get off my lawn about this. Yeah.
I'm the old man in the rocking chair on the porch saying Sonny, get off my lawn.
But you're also scientist. Okay. But I don't want to, okay.
I wear multiple hats. I'm also a dad. I'm also a husband.
I've got all these hats for all those things. In this particular case,
I'm old man and my old man sensibility is if you track what I shop at a store,
what would I buy at a store and then send me coupons based on what you think I'm
going to buy next based on what I bought before,
which is kind of the same thing you're describing.
You have denied me the chance of stumbling upon something that I never thought
of buying and that takes away my freedoms and I don't want that. How,
how have they denied you the chance of stumbling upon something different.
It's not diabolical. It's just in the casual flow of life. I'll give an example.
I walked into a wine shop, does it, can I help you?
And I say, if you help me find what I'm looking for,
it's a guarantee that I will never find what I'm not looking for
and I'll end up spending less money in your wine shop.
That's a weird way of looking at this. The Art of browsing, dude,
you're old enough to remember when I got to look up this word in a dictionary
and you get through six other words. Oh, I never knew that word.
Let me read that. You learn other words on route to the word you're targeting.
I understand. Okay,
well that is how I feel and that's how I think about my interaction with this
world. I'd like the randomness.
The randomness of it enriches my life.
And if you're going to advertise to me because you think you know who I am,
maybe you do,
but I'll ultimately end up spending less money because it's the diversity of how
I think and what I buy and what I think of buying and how I buy it and how much
money I spend. That is the richness of the life I lead. You're trying,
you're trying to channel me into some product,
so some something that fulfills a,
what do you call it when they have the w the study,
whether you're going to buy something or not. [inaudible] no, no. The the, the
table of people. Do you like this product or not a focus group? Yes.
Am I just a focus group to you? If I am,
you don't know me and I want to experience this world by stepping where I've
never stepped before and buying something I've never thought of buying.
And if you know my previous habits,
you're assuming I'm going to stay that way for the rest of my life and maybe
most people do, and maybe I might do that. But if I do it because I chose to,
not because you have decided that that's how I should be. Well,
don't you think they're screaming at you? I'm sorry.
You're getting a little excited. Sorry.
Don't you think they're just doing that because they think it would be effective
to advertise in that way. So if you go googling, um, new Nike's,
and then as you're looking at something and a Google ad pops up and it's for new
Nike's, I said, hey, now I know you were looking at the [inaudible].
We saw an ab a, I just need a little nudge. I mean, it's not,
I don't think that's that diabolical. I'm s I'm the old man on the porch.
I'm saying the next generation might feel completely different stim. I see.
I love it. They know exactly what I want.
You heard about the case where they were there? Uh, I, I read this,
I haven't re verified it, but it's completely plausible. Uh,
there was a teenage girl who was googling pregnancy tests cause maybe she got
pregnant. Okay.
And the fact that she had searched pregnancy tests,
she got coupons in the mail for baby products and our parents said,
what are the why? What is this?
Okay.
She got outed. That's a little weird. Yeah.
But it's the kind of thing that can happen that seems, that seems intrusive.
Certainly there's only because it's pregnancy, it's incredible in every way. No,
don't tell me it's not intrusive because you want to buy Nike's,
you physical things.
There's not just something that appears on your Google feed that you can quickly
glance over.
What's the difference between send you mail to your mailbox and filling your
advertising space in front of your face with product?
What's one other people can see it. I walk by your computer. I can see it.
Don't look,
I guess I'm arguing in principle rather than in detail. Okay.
Well let me take the counterpoint in the end. On the positive side,
what they're doing in terms of particularly Google in terms of your driving,
right.
And in terms of using of Google maps and documenting the history of all these
people driving and especially with things like ways which they acquired as
they've developed a much more efficient products than apple.
Which what apple does, the apple maps, they shred everything you do.
Yes they do. They did. They bought where you been and where you're going.
See that's correct. But apple maps sucks. So you have to,
cause they don't have enough data, they don't have nearly the amount of data.
Google has billions. Do Google giving you that apple maps isn't,
they're telling you you're 22 minutes from home time for you to drive home.
You valuing that well yes. And also map, wait, hold on.
There are programs far better.
I can ask it how long it'll take me to go somewhere rather than it knowing what
my drug, what my daytime schedule looks like. And then coming in like you said,
how do you know bitch? You know I had that same reaction as you did. And I said,
I wonder why, what's causing this? It's a little creepy. And again,
I'm the old man syndrome.
So a 10 year old kid that's only ever known this and becomes 15 and 20 that is
life to them. Right? Why would they even,
maybe they're not gonna complain about it, but I'm the old man on the porch,
but you know what I'm saying? Get off my lawn,
sort of intrusiveness or at the very least,
this connection that you have to these devices and that they have to your
patterns and your information, it seems inevitable.
That doesn't mean I have to welcome it with open arms, but I agree.
It's inevitable. I agree. Plus we have security cameras everywhere.
Everybody knows where you are.
If the KGB had access to people the way we in the,
during the Cold War, the way modern the United States has access to us,
we would say, oh my gosh, you have taken away your country's freedoms.
Where the free leaders of the free world and you guys have been prisoned your
entire population. Oh my gosh.
The KGB would give their right arm to have the monitoring devices that are
actively in place here in the United States today. We know where you are.
We know how long you stayed there. We have records of it.
We know what streets you were walking on. We don't necessarily monitor it,
but we can dig it up if we have to. And with facial recognition,
I can track you wherever you are. I feel like there, use the facial recognition.
I use it now. It doesn't care if I'm wearing,
if I'm wearing a hat or sunglasses, it still knows who the hell I am.
It relies on so many points.
You have so many points of cheekbones and nose eye separations and everything.
I think ratios of numbers are highly powerful probes of the structure in the
form of things. Just so you know the Fibonacci sequence, right?
That could be in there if you have a Fibonacci head, doesn't everybody's face.
She was, I think is a little overplayed. Fibonacci's a little overplayed.
Especially once you get a nose job. So Fibonacci,
you can find it in nature and say, Oh, isn't this beautiful?
But you've overlooked all the places where it doesn't show up in nature so pure.
So many times it doesn't appear in more places than it does appear. Right.
But in a lot of living things, living fans of course combs, pineapples,
there's a lot of sunflower seeds. It's very, or sunflowers flowers. Yeah.
Really Weird isn't it? Yeah.
I mean it's just this random, I mean not random, but this is,
well if the next thing you do depends on the previous two things you did,
you get the Fibonacci series.
I mean that's often the case with say, you know,
think of things in your life you do wear.
The third thing you do depends on you having done the previous two things in
this exactly the same way. That's not everything in your life,
but you can surely find some things that do that. Hmm.
I think it was Camden, New Jersey where they had such a crisis. That's such,
that was so random. No, it's not talking about surveillance. Camden,
New Jersey had such a crisis of funding that I think there was a brief period of
time, at least, I don't know if it's changed,
where they literally didn't have a police force and one of their solutions was
to put surveillance cameras everywhere and the idea was to sort of try to
capture all the shit that was going down.
Here it is the surveillance city of Camden, New Jersey, a community be serious.
The Guy Crime and the intrusive tools they're using in hopes of stopping it.
Right? Yeah. This was a, I mean,
I don't remember reading in class after this happening. It's,
let me take away your freedoms for your own safety. [inaudible] yeah.
This is a well known, you know Benjamin Franklin wrote about it,
which his famous Benjamin Franklin quote about security and freedom. Yeah.
He knew abandons for freedom for security serves neither is getting neither or
something. Yeah. Yeah. So, so this is not yet.
They that can give up essential liberty to attain a little temporary safety
deserve. Neither liberty nor safety.
Those who sacrificed liberty for safety, for security deserve neither.
He who would trade liberty for some temporary security deserve. Neither liberty.
He's got all combinations. Yeah man, he covered that bitch.
All permutations on that one. This is so mean.
I don't want to leave any room for misquoting. He understood that. So you're,
you're security. You give up some security for privacy I think.
Yes.
And I don't know if it's a well known place where that should be drawn and you
can actually get an entire generation born into a state where they think that's
normal. We all now think it's normal.
You have to show id to walk into an office building. Oh my gosh.
What would that look like during the Cold War?
You have to show you in the United States,
you have to show your papers just to walk into a building while they're also
changing. Oh my gosh. System where if you don't want to travel with a passport,
you're going to have to have a new 40 been through that.
A federal driver's license, federally endorsed driver's license.
I just went through that last week. Right. So when did that go into play?
When is that going? Um, it's for everybody. Like next year or something.
It's very soon. If you want to travel in a particular way,
if you don't drive or anything, then it doesn't matter. Fly. Right?
We want to fly. Correct. Correct. And I carry my passport wherever I go,
so it's not really a problem for me. But uh,
so carry your passport everywhere you go.
If you want to just jet out of the country that this spot.
How has your brain wired to escape?
Uh, no. If I had four passports then you'd say, do I want to leave the country?
Whoever. Anybody in a, you know, espionage movie,
there's somebody who has five passports and with the,
with wads of cash of every currency. So,
so I think I worry that we're sliding towards a state of total monitoring on the
premise that we're all better off for it.
And it's like the frog in the heated water.
We don't feel it day by day,
but it's happening cause we all agree that we can be hand patted down just to
get on an airplane.
We've all accepted that because of a handful of people,
a handful of historically a handful, historically handful,
not even a handful in this moment, just historically and field people.
We all say, yes, take my luggage, X-ray, my luggage, um,
take away my liquids, pat me down and I'm okay with that.
W that's a transition and I'm okay with security cameras in the street.
It was okay in banks, we understood that,
but now when I exit the bank and I'm in the street when I'm walking and walking
in the park, so I don't know. I don't know the future of that.
I really don't know.
I saw the movie 1984 recently and not a very good way where the book is better
than the movie and I hate to be the one of the people who say that,
but I was reminded how you can create an entire state where everyone is kept in
line because somebody is telling you we are fighting this battle out on the
front lines. I'd forgotten this from the book,
that they're fighting a war on the front lines. You never see the war.
You never hear about the war.
You don't know anything about the war other than it exists and you have to do
things a certain way in country so that your country can protect itself from
these evil people that want to take over and destroy your way of life.
And so everybody's under control. Some big brother. Well,
what they didn't anticipate though was these social media companies would be
the, the guards are the gatekeepers of your privacy.
Cause that's what's interesting is because you voluntarily give them all your
information. It's not governments, it's Twitter and Facebook, Google,
all the stuff that we use on a daily basis that has access to everything that
you do. That's almost
inconceivable to someone outside of this generation that there would be a
company that would provide a service.
And through that service you would give up all notions of privacy. Privacy.
Yeah.
Because literally you have a microphone that's listening everywhere you go,
you have a bug there. You can route with you. I mean I don't remember what,
yeah, you've been, you've been pinned, bucked, right? Yeah. Pinned with a lapel.
You will get ads for things you talk about and that has been proven.
So what is that?
What does is these passive listening devices that only picking up key words?
It's no big deal. It's just key words. The frog in the water.
That's why I'm telling you. Yeah, so I don't know where it's going to go.
Like I said, I'm a little old folk, old fogy about that,
but I think we'll resolve it. Do you think there should be regulation?
Generally if you have something good and it gets abused, you regulate it.
That's the whole point of right. We're here alive today because of regulation,
because there are nefarious people who in control of powerful forces operating
on society would gain at the expense of everyone else and would not be good for
the progress of civilization. So you regulate, okay.
Airlines are regulated so that you don't die. All right.
W we have the safest record now ever for commercial airlines,
American carriers, the safest ever look at,
look at not only how many people have not died relative to when we grew up,
we grew up there with at least one or two planes crashed each year.
You'd lose between one and 300 people every year.
That was like the baseline number.
That number is near zero now.
And way more planes are taking off and landing that at any time when we were
kids. So it's a double,
it's a double um,
progress point for not only the transportation safety administration,
but uh, engineering technology and everything we care about. We want to fly.
So you regulate, you make sure these are inspected this often you don't,
the pilots don't fly more than this many hours. You, this gets oiled,
this gets replaced. Um, it's one of the triumphs of modern engineering,
aerodynamics, uh, um,
aerospace engineering as a branch of what we do as civilization is one of the
greatest achievements there ever was a grade. Jamie,
did you find that a stealth stuff?
I've found there are cars that have black velvet car.
This would be a laboratory laboratory. Oh, okay.
Oh look up a laboratory. A
stealth light. Something try that.
Yeah. I found the lamp,
like a cloaks that people wear that sort of seems like video chat. Yeah. Yeah.
That seems like fuckery. Yeah. There's a lot of, but in Harry Potter, the, the,
the, the,
what's the cloak that they were the invisibility cloak that would be this
principle if it existed with that. Here's a bunch of videos of that,
but it seems like they're just using after effects like Adobe or something like
that to fuck with the video rather than create an actual product that,
because there was a woman in an office that had a blanket and she held up the
blanket and you could only see the whole office,
you wouldn't see the blanket at all. You'd see what's behind her. Behind her.
She lowered the blanket. You could see her and then from the blanket down,
just a green screen of the bad thing. But that's what it was.
I think she was holding up a green blankets.
This might be it still this dark matter. No, no, no, no, no. Sorry. Sorry. No,
no, no. There's nothing to do with that. That's,
that's the math of dark matter in the universe. The three dimensional map.
I've tried to give that a shot. Yes. No, we don't know what it is,
so don't worry about it if you don't understand that,
but it's too God damn confusing for me. No, it's not confusing at all.
It's like it's something out there that has 85% of the,
of the universe and we don't know what the hell. It is confusing.
It's not confusing. It's, it's, if you don't know what it is,
it's confusing by nature. Okay. I have more nuanced definition of confusing.
Confusing is I am confused. I don't know how to think.
Dark matter is, I don't even know what to think.
I need something in my head to be confused. Right. Dark matter has. There's no,
we don't know.
What the hell do you anticipate a solution to that or some sort of, sure.
I want my eyes in Hawaii. I hope that damned might've been, yeah,
telescope might've been. Yeah. Listen folks, it's not the GDT.
There'll be the goddamn toast. It's the TMT 30 meter telescope. So yeah,
solutions too. We, you don't know. Part of the,
what it is to explore is not knowing what it is that you will find and all these
telescopes, the launched ones as well as the ground based ones.
We have an a foresight,
we're mature enough as a field to know that even though it's designed to look
for certain things that were part of the program that you set up for it,
you want to have a serendipity mode for it. You want to be able to say,
let's point it in some random direction and see what shows up.
Without that you could miss something in plain sight.
If you're only looking for one thing that you think is there extrapolated from
what you knew before. And the way I think of it is, you know the,
there's the old saying as the area of our knowledge grows,
so too does the perimeter of our ignorance.
So as that area goes there more places to look over the fence and stare into the
abyss of ignorance that awaits you.
So
dark matter is sitting on the other side of the fence that the way I've heard it
described as the bonfire of our knowledge grows brighter.
The area of our ignorance is illuminated.
Okay. That I had to think about that. Yeah. Now it's similar to what I said.
I'm more things are eliminated to bonfire is your knowledge.
That's lighting the way as it grows bigger, you go see more stuff you've never,
you've never noticed before. It's the same principle. That's a giant one though,
man. 85% it's 85% of gravity. So yeah,
and you add that to the dark energy. We don't know what that is either. Right?
Dark matter,
dark energy comprise 95% of everything that's driving the universe.
So everything we know and love the chemistry, the physics, the biology, life,
planets, stars is 5% of the universe now.
So people sort of theologians and folks say, well,
maybe God is in the other 95% maybe. Okay. But yeah,
made God's dark matter. Wouldn't it be crazy? Well, people say that. Surprise.
Yeah.
But I don't know why dark matter would care about gay people, whether
or not checks drive cars. Yeah. Yeah.
Depending on which religion you're in right now,
all the religions got their thing wearing God. She know him. God, I'm on,
I'm dark matter. Yeah. Um, we, by the way,
it just, it, um, in, in letters from an astrophysics physicist,
uh, which isn't out yet, but again, I don't know how the hell you got the book,
but it's, um, there's, I,
there's an entire chapter where I am conversing with people who are strongly
religious. There's a conversation I have in there with a,
an orthodox Jewish person, a Muslim, multiple, um,
fundamentalist Christians.
And we're talking about the age of the earth and why and why do we think one way
or another. And so that's,
there's a lot of intimate stuff in there that I generally don't go public with,
but I did it one on one with those who had written to me about these challenges
they were facing in life and they wanted to know what an astrophysicist had to
say about it.
What's the youngest version of how old a religious person thinks the earth is?
What's the, how? What's the 6,000 years? That's the question. Yes, Christian.
Well, oh, of all. Uh, not all Christians by the way. No, no.
Of all religions. I don't know. The age is like a month old.
I D I don't know enough about how old all the religions think the universe is
the youngest.
You're going to get the youngest university and you get from a devout Christian
6,000 years.
The oldest is around 10,000 and but as far and away from billions,
Mormons are a unique one because they think you get your own planet when you
die. Yeah. And what's, what's funny horn on that?
I want my own planet. Nobody told me that. Uh, I,
it's odd how one religious group would,
would comment on how preposterous another religious groups comments are.
I love that. You know, I was once, I don't know if you know this,
I was once quoted after,
I think the Scientology documentary came out on HBO and everybody was talking
about at least I think that was it.
And there was a lot of chat about it for a couple of weeks and one of the news
outlets, I forgot who called me up and said,
do I think Scientology should be a religion
classified as a religion, as an authentic religion? And you can ask, well,
why are they calling me? Why? Well,
because in Scientology there aliens and if there's space beatings that comes to
give up this information. Oh, sorry. I know.
So that's how I got brought into this conversation because of the sectors of
Scientology that involves space beings. Okay. All right.
So my answer was we live in a country that protects the free expression of faith
based systems provided they don't subtract from the rights of others.
So I will not sit here and judge whether they tens from space exude souls from
volcanoes, at least a third of what I just said is accurate.
It's from from Scientology
or whether a man born of a woman is the son of God who died and rose from the
dead.
I'm not going to compare those and judge whether one of them is more authentic
than another when they're both founded on belief systems.
And so in this country,
belief systems are protected and we've all bought into that.
And so you know what the headline was? Tyson defense,
I'll tell you, that was the clickbait of my comment there.
You got to distort there.
There are some rational people who in the comment thread said,
that's not what he said. Of course. Yeah.
But isn't it more interesting when they do do that?
And then inside the actual article itself,
they give you full quote so people can see the deception,
the real confusing things when they take a chunk of your quote out of context.
Yeah, take it out of context with they love to do so. You know what,
I just go to jail for that, by the way. So That's interesting. So for me, I,
I'm an observer of that, not a complainer about it.
So is that how they're doing it? Okay.
So maybe I can shape this phrase differently to minimize the chance of that
happening in the future. You being lied about. Correct.
So for me that is a landscape. There's some landmines here.
There is some trap doors here. There is some things. And so for me,
one who communicates on that landscape,
that's just information for me to navigate it slightly more nimbly in the
future. Got It. Interesting. Gravity.
This is one thing that I was still hooked. Hookup on gravity.
I'm always hooked up on gravity. Um, cause uh, as you should be.
Well since we've talked last,
I've been reading a lot about it and one of the things that confuses me the most
is that we don't really understand what gravity is,
but we know it's effects. We can measure them, we know how to measure them,
we know what that mass is involved,
but we don't really know what gravity is.
There's a similar question in the book,
but they got a little more philosophical than you just did.
But they both lean philosophical.
It's science can describe how gravity works,
but can they describe why it works 10 weeks. So this is the how,
why duality here and allow me to just answer it from a how,
why point of view. And then we can apply it to gravity after I say that. Um,
in science,
if we can describe how something works and predict its future behavior,
we claim to understand it and we move on. You can ask deeper questions about it.
Why is there gravity and what is the meaning? What is the purpose?
And Go ahead.
But I'm good with what I've done and I can land a spacecraft on Mars inside of a
crater, in a hole in one using my understanding of gravity.
So I'm pretty good with it. Okay,
so I'm not distracted by the more philosophical side of that.
Why does it work? Okay. Einstein is though,
so Newton was deeply puzzled by how you can have something called [inaudible] in
which he coined the phrase action at a distance. Okay?
He wrote down the equation that worked. He wants any equation.
The moon goes around the earth, earth grows on the sun.
The moons of Jupiter Go-round Jupiter, he
accurately described that with his equations of gravity. Okay?
He said one day,
I think we're going to find some way that they're connecting to each other,
but I don't know what that is right now, but I know my equations work.
He called it spooky. It was spooky to him. That's his word.
Spooky action at a distance. All right.
Fast forward 300 years.
300 no. Fast forward 250, 230 years. Get to Albert Einstein.
Um, gravity is the curvature of space and time
and you're moving on the curvature of that fabric. That's gravity.
Oh my gosh. Is it even a fortune then?
Is it even so there's no need to think of it as an action at a distance.
And in a phrase, first uttered by, I think it was John Archibald Wheeler,
a student of Einstein, and he,
I learned relativity from John or showboat wheel effect.
That's where I met my wife in relativity class in graduate school. Um,
it's space matter.
Tell space how to curve space tells matter how to move.
It moves on the curvature of space. You don't need an action at a distance.
There was no action. It, no it can't do anything else but do that.
It's like you have a funnel and you take a ball and you're rolling on the
funnel.
The ball can only do what that funnel tells it to do and it'll Cirque,
if you give it a sideways motion, it'll start spinning around.
There is no magic hand coming in there.
It is following the curvature of it's space, time, continuum,
this construct that you provided for it.
So now I can describe what gravity is doing.
I even have a mechanism for it.
Are you going to still ask me why is there gravity?
Is that answered not enough to you? Even in the y department
you can say, well why would a particle curves space?
You can just keep doing that. That's fine,
but is there a point where we where you'll be satisfied with the answer? Oh,
that answers my why. I can say,
well why did this half liter of water drop off the edge here?
Well, it's no longer, the forces are imbalanced and it's a no,
but why did it fall? Well, there's nothing holding it up. Why did it?
There's a point where it's not especially productive to continue to think about
the world that way because I what I'm,
what I'm claiming is answers to the how.
Okay.
When you understand the, how enough
are tantamount to having answered the why question. That's all.
That's what I'm telling them out in terms of the ability to measure it and
accurately use it. Correct. So we can say, okay, but isn't it,
you've got a board. Yes. We can say, well why did you go bald? Well, okay,
the hair follicles ad when you start in your late twenties and early,
what'd you go bald? When did you start losing your hair?
Probably late twenties early thirties yeah. That's common.
If you have your hair when you're 30 you'll probably have it for the rest of
your life. That's the how that goes. You start losing it up, right?
Going up until you're 30 so you can say,
well the hair follicle begins does not producing the dead,
the Keratin or whatever. We get the explanation. Then you say,
well why does the hair follicles stop doing that? Then you say,
oh well because the DNA has a pre coded about the hair.
Kind of say well why does the DNA have the hair?
Well because so right,
but we know far more about how and why people go bald than we do about what
gravity really is. Correct.
I'm telling you gravity really is the curvature of space and time
that gets us the Big Bang and everything we've ever known and just space and
time. But it's also based on mass, right?
It's based on the amount of any concentration of matter and energy and or energy
will curve the fabric of space and time.
And the more the movement of matter on that fabric of space and time we call
gravity. And I'm good with that.
Okay. But you seem a little oddly defensive about something that's scientific.
No, I have to say I'm good with that. But you, you,
you are cause you kinda defending it. No, you can say, well why does matter?
You need to know why. Why does say no?
I'm saying why does matter and energy curve the fabric of space and time.
You can ask that. Okay. Why? And I don't have an answer. If I can say,
well that's all I'm asking. Well, no one watches. What I'm telling you is okay,
you don't need to know what got you to the point, right?
We had to walk to that point where your y got unanswered.
I understand that, but before we got to that point, I answered otherwise,
but I'm not disputing that. Good. Good.
So what I'm telling you is that I can answer your why question most of the time,
but then you'll come back to a point where there's a point where there's the why
doesn't have the answer. So you say, why did it fall?
I say there's a force of gravity operating on it. Why did it fall that way?
Because of the curvature of space and time. I'm answering your whys.
I understand. Then why does matter and energy, Kurt? Space and time.
Okay, that's a frontier. We're still working on that, but that's all I'm asking.
That's good. That's fine. You are a man of science.
So you are a person that should probably embrace wise except that many people
who ask why questions, they really want to know.
Purpose of not asking purpose.
Well then that distinguishes you from many other people who ask why questions.
Oh, okay. I don't think, I don't know if this is get up.
Why did you bang the table? I was angry. There's purpose,
there's a purpose behind it. So, so yeah,
if your why is just a curiosity of what's going on,
that's one thing. If you are inquiring about purpose,
then it gets theological. Okay. Because when you're theological,
then religions give purpose to life. Really. I'm not doing that right.
But I just think it's amazing that something that is such a massive part of life
on this planet that we stayed glued to the ground because of gravity.
Can you pull up my Instagram account?
I only post you have an Instagram account now cause you had a fake one for
awhile. Yeah, I took it over and actually I know that guy. I took it over.
He gave it to you. Oh, do you? The Guy who had it? Yeah. No, no, no. Actually,
I sorry, I went to Instagram,
said people think this is a real account and it's not, can I have it back?
And if it's an account that's an impostor and followers don't know it,
it's illegal. So, uh, so there's,
there's one that says fan of Neil Tyson and that's a different one. Okay. Okay.
So I only post art house photos, okay. That I've taken most of which I've taken.
So just scroll down and look for muscle beach. There it is. Click on that.
Okay, so here's my cap. Go to my caption, go full screen on that.
And then my captain. Okay. For most of our life on earth,
we either resist or succumb to the force of gravity at Muscle beach.
Gravity loses every time. That's not true.
I was proud of that caption. You Go, you call me out on that caption.
That's nonsense. Gravity never lose this.
Gravity doesn't even have like little tiny losses.
It's not like this is a war and gravity loses a battle.
I was just listening to this. So I was at, I was in Venice,
California and the sun was setting behind some guy who was doing,
who was doing a hand pressed hand presses suspended up on this chin up bar.
Right. And it was real. So it was cool. He was silhouetted. There's a palm tree,
there's the beach. He's there. He's going to beat that motherfucker.
Let me tell you eventually. But while he is, while he is there,
he's conquering gravity. Are you getting too old?
You haven't called your gravity lately? No, I work out all the time.
I'm not buying it. No, I ain't conquered shit. He's pulling rank now.
He said I work out and you don't cause I see your middle age man. Belly.
Um, well when I've talked to other astrophysicists and signs, let me ask,
are these conversations supposed to have like a theme or purpose or is it just
you sit there and just whatever comes to your head, you send my way? Yeah.
Well clearly it's just whatever comes to mind.
How do you say this episode is about, you can't say that. I don't ever do that.
You don't do that. Okay, fine. That's just episode number two. My success.
I've got no obligation, no commitments. The fucking I ever have a thread.
Think about all the different people that of course, yeah, of course.
It's like impossible.
Of course fighters and scientists and scholars and crackpots
bunch of different people coming through here. Man, I can't have any agenda.
I mean that's probably the only reason why this thing is successful as it is,
but that's a weird one for people that this one thing that is so powerful.
What is, oh gravity. That's a weird one for people. Yeah.
I mean it seems like you're frustrated by all the various questions,
so it's like, no, you seem a little, a little defensive there.
Cause I thought that I thought you were taking your why to ultimately mean
purpose. If it's just why I'm,
I'm claiming that many responses to how are also responses to a why that that's,
that's the point I'm making and I don't like splitting definitions.
People ultimately understand gravity. I think we do.
That's why we can land things on Mars. We understand what we do,
which is why your cell phone gets time from GPS satellites.
That is pre corrected for Einstein's general theory of relativity because
they're at a different gravitational field than you in orbit than you are on
earth surface. We got this,
we guide Stein is triumphing. We're running short on time here.
So I sent you something that I wanted to ask you, which sent you a, an email.
Did you get that email? I did. I did a black hole that landed in a, in a,
in a mysterious place in our understandings. Yeah. So let me,
let me just give the, I'll give the, the,
the sort of Reader's digest version of this. Okay. Okay.
There are black holes that are t Jamie.
They're black holes that are formed at the consequence of the death of stars.
Okay? Okay.
And we think we understand the formation of stars well enough to say with stars
born with this much mass and it'll lose certain amount of mass over its life.
All stars lose mass because there's so much pressure and so much energy coming
out of carries particles with it. So they they lose mass.
The son is losing mass as we speak. It's called the solar wind.
So everybody loses mass out there. The question is,
at what rate are you losing mass?
Is it a lot compared to your total mass is it's small.
So very high mass stars are not especially stable objects.
They remained stars for 100,000 at most a million years and they'll explode and
become a supernova if your more massive than that,
they will not explode because the gravity is so strong that it cannot explode
against the strength of the gravity and it collapses into a black hole.
So we expect black holes to have slightly less mass,
somewhat less mass than the most massive stars that we know how to make.
So if you have a hundreds times the mass of the Sun Star,
it'll lose half of its mass over its life.
And you have a black hole that's 30 times the mass of the center.
50 Times the Matheson fine put a pin in that it,
the centers of galaxies, there are super massive black holes,
hundreds of thousands, millions times the mass of the sun.
And we call, they're super massive and they're black holes.
We call them supermassive black holes.
Cause that's how we roll as astrophysicists. Alright, well,
could you have black holes somewhere in the middle of these two extremes?
We do not know a phenomenon that will give you a black hole that's in between,
that will birth a black hole that's in between these two,
these two categories.
You can make a black hole that eats its way there fine.
But we don't know how to make one. And we think we,
my colleagues who've done this think they've discovered a black hole that is
sitting in this sort of netherworld where there's no evidence that at eight to
become that massive and we don't know how to explain it by the formation and
death of stars and is nowhere near the supermassive black hole in the center of
the galaxy. So it's the frontier of research at this moment.
So it's just a newly discovered type of black hole in a mash regime that they
say physically impossible. You know, headlines. We're weeding the headline out,
black hole shock. The, show me the, the, uh, where this appears,
uh, or express. So this, this a British, uh, I think they're British.
There's anyhow, uh, it's a news digest for science.
So black hole shock theory swirl around the discovery of a physically impossible
black hole.
So scientists don't use the word impossible unless it's violating a known law of
physics. Um,
so I th I bet that was a editor editors title and I don't have a problem.
I don't mind a little bit of sensationalism there.
You can say it is a black hole that comes from an,
if it comes from an object,
it is an object we know nothing about and have yet to discover.
We're not gonna say it's an impossible on j [inaudible].
Every time we point the telescope to the universe,
we find something that we'd never predicted or understood.
And it adds to the knowledge base of where do you have,
whenever they do discover things,
and then that becomes what we know and understand like the supermassive black
holes at the center of every galaxy.
That was a fairly recent discovery in terms of,
it was hypothesized because we saw the centers of guys who were behaving really
weirdly things stars are moving faster than they should've given how much
gravity was tugging on them. And we said, dude,
something's got to be there and it's gotta be really small because we're
tracking stars really close to the middle. Well,
if it was made of ordinary matter, how big it would have to have to be really,
really big. So this has to be really, really small in order for this to happen.
The only thing we know that could fill that small volume and have that much
gravity is a black hole. So it was suspected for a long time.
It was confirmed that as a common thing by the Hubble telescope and first
photographed by this recent result in the galaxy m 87 MSCI 87 is what is,
that's the name of the galaxy.
You can determine how big the black hole is based on the size of the galaxy.
We can determine the mass of the black hole by how fast stars are moving at the
distance they are from it. So in other words, so,
so were earth orbiting the sun and we have a certain speed we're going about,
I forgot how to what? Uh, 18 miles per second.
I think that's the number. 30 kilometers a second. And that's our speed around.
That's a speed around the sun. That's pretty fast. Okay. Um,
if the sun had more mass instantly,
that speed is not enough to maintain our orbit.
It will start spiraling in towards it. If the sun had less mass,
that speed is too high to be in this orbit,
it'll take it to there. Sorry. It's too fast to maintain this orbit.
It'll climb us out to a higher orbit, slowest down,
and we'll be in a higher orbit with a slower speed. So in other words,
for any object at any distance,
there's only one speed you can maintain and have a stable orbit around it.
So when we see stars orbiting something in the center of the galaxy,
it is a straightforward astro one oh two equation to calculate how much mass the
thing is orbiting and you get the mass and you can't see it. It's small,
it's a black hole. And that ladies and gentlemen is the end of the podcast.
This buck will be available when it comes out in October, first week of October.
I'm very proud of this book. It's my most heartfelt thing that I've ever done.
Well when it comes out,
I will take a photograph and put it up on the Instagram and the Twitter and
everybody know. Yeah. And it's, it's a, um,
it also has letters from people in prison.
The person who had just learned that they were had terminal cancer.
I mean there's a lot of people reaching out, responding to letters. Yes.
It's me responding and their letters, I can't fit all of their letters.
Some are very long tomes, but most of the,
their letters in there and all of my correspondence is in there. So it's,
it's my most heartfelt contribution to this universe.
And Star talk is still a pilot. Still going, still go. It's Dar talk.
We'd pump it up. 50 episodes and a television show. Oh yes.
So we can see if we're going to have a new season. We don't know yet. Uh,
that's to be announced. But we're going through,
it's always a podcast and we've got a youtube channel,
start talk youtube channel.
And we're thinking of branching out into other kinds of, uh,
of educational product that's still fun and comedic and the like. And I,
and I love your support for this, cause you're, you're also a comedian,
so you know the value.
And I love comedians that have their fundamental part of how we deliver science
to the public on star talk. So thanks for, for that plug. My pleasure,
my friend. Yeah, thank you. Always good.
Good. Thanks very much. Bye. Bye Buddy.
[inaudible]
[inaudible].